INSOLVENCY
ADMINISTRATION

Canadian Association of Insolvency and Restructuring Professionals

Course for
Insolvency Administrators

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 2
Table of Contents
WELCOME ... 9
INSOLVENCY ADMINISTRATION COURSE MAP ... 10
Roles and responsibilities ...11
1. INTRODUCTION TO INSOLVENCY ... 12
1.1. Introduction ...15
1.2. Rules of conduct and ethics ...16
1.3. History of statutes and the profession ...17
1.4. Current legislation ...18
1.5. Typical appointments and your role ...19
1.6. Key Organizations...21
1.7. Ethics and professionalism ...23
1.8. Public trust and policy ...23
2. ASSESS DEBTOR’S FINANCIAL SITUATION ... 25
2.1. Introduction ...28
2.2. Assessment ...28
2.3. Conducting the assessment interview ...29
2.4. Alternate courses of action ...33
2.5. Brief introduction to insolvency concepts ...38
3. BANKRUPTCY ADMINISTRATION PROCESS OVERVIEW ... 41
3.1. Introduction ...44
3.2. The bankruptcy administration process ...44
4. DIVISION I PROPOSAL ADMINISTRATION PROCESS OVERVIEW ... 60
4.1. Introduction ...64

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 3
4.2. The Division I Proposal administration process ...64
4.3. Division I proposals ...67
5. CONSUMER PROPOSAL ADMINISTRATION ... 84
5.1. Introduction ...87
5.2. The consumer proposal administration process ...88
5.3. Consumer proposals ...93
6. PREPARE DOCUMENTS FOR OSB; SUBMIT ... 100
6.1. Introduction ... 103
6.2. Document Preparation ... 103
6.3. Obtain Trustee’s assessment ... 104
6.4. Prepare documents required ... 106
6.5. Review and share with Trustee ... 110
6.6. Obtain debtor’s and Trustee’s signature ... 110
6.7. Submit to OSB ... 111
6.8. Certificate of Appointment ... 113
6.9. Send notices and other documents to creditors ... 113
Appendix A ... 116
Appendix B ... 117
Appendix C ... 119
Appendix D ... 120
7. PROOFS OF CLAIM ... 121
7.1. Introduction ... 123
7.2. Form 31 ... 125
7.3. Admitting and disallowing claims ... 126
7.4. Creditors’ rights and obligations ... 127

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 4
8. TRUSTEE’S PRELIMINARY REPORT ... 129
8.1. Introduction ... 131
8.2. Determine need to prepare preliminary report ... 131
8.3. Significance of the preliminary report ... 131
8.4. Gather information known to date ... 132
8.5. Finalizing the report ... 135
9. TRUSTEE’S REPORT TO CREDITORS IN A DIVISION I, CONSUMER
PROPOSAL ... 136
9.1. Introduction ... 138
9.2. Determine the report that should be prepared ... 138
9.3. Gather information ... 140
9.4. Draft the report in proper form and with proper content ... 141
9.5. Finalizing the report ... 142
10. THE FIRST MEETING OF CREDITORS ... 143
10.1. Introduction ... 146
10.2. Background... 146
10.3. Bankruptcy pre-meeting administration ... 147
10.4. Purpose of the meeting ... 148
10.5. Roles & responsibilities ... 149
10.6. The meeting ... 151
10.7. Inspectors ... 153
10.8. Closing the meeting and next steps ... 153
10.9. Proposals ... 154
11. SECURE TRUSTEE’S INTEREST ... 157
11.1. Introduction ... 159

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 5
11.2. Secure Trustee’s interest in property of the bankruptcy estate ... 159
11.3. Viewing documentation to determine the extent of the Trustee’s interest ... 164
11.4. PPSA searches in provinces other than Quebec ... 164
11.5. Searches in Quebec ... 165
11.6. Obtain co-operation from joint owners of the bankrupt’s property (if applicable) ... 168
11.7. Securing the Trustee’s interest in property under a proposal ... 169
12. VALUE ASSETS: RESEARCH METHODS OF SALE ... 170
12.1. Introduction ... 173
12.2. Bankrupt’s Property ... 173
12.3. What is not property of the bankrupt? ... 174
12.4. After-acquired property ... 180
12.5. Surplus income ... 181
12.6. Asset value assessment ... 182
12.7. Mode of realizations ... 183
12.8. Notice requirements ... 187
12.9. Approvals required ... 188
13. REALIZATION OF ASSETS ... 190
13.1. Introduction ... 193
13.2. Sale authorization ... 193
13.3. Notice requirements ... 195
13.4. Rules of Professional Conduct ... 195
13.5. Recovering proceeds if conveyed to a third party ... 197
13.6. Income tax returns ... 197
13.7. Secured creditor ... 199
13.8. Exempt assets ... 201

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 6
13.9. Some notes on common assets ... 201
13.10. Trust accounts ... 206
13.11. Property incapable of being realized ... 207
14. ADMINISTER DISCHARGE OF DEBTOR, INCLUDING S. 170 REPORT . 208
14.1. Introduction ... 210
14.2. Proposal and bankruptcy ... 210
14.3. Duties of the insolvent person ... 212
14.4. Bankrupt’s discharge ... 217
14.5. Proposal only ... 221
15. ADMINISTER DIVISION I PROPOSAL ... 222
15.1. Introduction ... 224
15.2. Acceptance of a proposal by the creditors ... 224
15.3. Approval by the court ... 224
15.4. Refusal/default of the proposal... 225
15.5. Amendments ... 227
15.6. Bankruptcy assignments ... 227
16. ADMINISTER CONSUMER PROPOSAL ... 229
16.1. Introduction ... 232
16.2. Deemed acceptance of a proposal by the creditors ... 232
16.3. Approval by the court ... 233
16.4. Completion of the proposal ... 234
16.5. Default of the proposal ... 235
16.6. Amendment to consumer proposal ... 237
16.7. Bankruptcy assignments ... 237

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 7
17. MONITOR FILE; ENSURE COMPLETENESS; ORGANIZE & CLOSE FILE
 ... 239
17.1. Introduction ... 242
17.2. Mechanism to track status of the administration of the file ... 242
17.3. Bankruptcy ... 243
17.4. Proposal ... 244
17.5. Counselling sessions ... 244
17.6. Handling of trust funds ... 245
17.7. Banking / trust accounts ... 245
17.8. Undistributed funds and unpaid dividends ... 250
17.9. Follow-up items ... 251
17.10. WEPPA ... 254
18. ADMINISTER DISCHARGE OF TRUSTEE ... 256
18.1. Introduction ... 259
18.2. Prepare interim Statements of Receipts & Disbursements ... 259
18.3. Preparation of Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ... 260
18.4. Trustee’s fees and expenses ... 261
18.5. Levy & Dividends ... 263
18.6. Details on the final R&D ... 264
18.7. OSB’s role in Trustee’s discharge ... 265
18.8. Taxation - summary administration and consumer proposals ... 265
18.9. Taxation – ordinary administration & Division I proposals ... 266
18.10. Trustee’s discharge ... 267
19. ADMINISTER RECEIVERSHIP ... 268
19.1. Introduction ... 271

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 8
19.2. General definitions ... 272
19.3. Private appointment ... 272
19.4. Court appointment ... 277
19.5. Administration ... 279
19.6. Taking possession, security, and stocktaking ... 282
19.7. Continuing operations ... 284
19.8. Sale of assets ... 288
19.9. Final steps ... 288

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 9
Welcome
Thank you for enrolling in the Insolvency Administration Course. This course teaches you the
administration processes involved in handling a bankruptcy, a proposal or a receivership in
Canada.
Course materials
The course material consists of:
1. Insolvency Administration modules;
2. Competency assessments;
3. Reference glossary.
Program rules
To follow the program, you will also require the IA Course Policy and Guidelines –
available on our website www.cairp.ca. Please read this document carefully as it contains
important information on the program.
Competency Assessments (CAs)
Each module has a matching Competency Assessment component, which is to be completed
online. You are to complete the lesson assignments, or “Competency Assessments” in order,
beginning with Module 1, “Introduction to Insolvency”. You must successfully complete each
CA with a passing mark of at least 60%, before you can move on to the next one. Once the
CA is completed, you will receive the results in real-time, with a mark for the assignment.
More information can be found in “Frequently Asked Questions” posted to D2L.
Exam readiness
.
Once you have successfully completed all 19 CAs, you are eligible to write the final exam.
The exam is available on-demand and you must contact the CAIRP program coordinator
(benjamin.lecointre@cairp.ca) once you have completed the course requirements to register
for the exam and pay your exam fee. Once you have successfully passed the exam you will
receive a certificate of completion. If you are unsuccessful on the exam you should arrange
for payment for another exam attempt. The exam passing grade is 60%.
The Course Map
This is a course map, not a process chart. Each box in the map corresponds with a course
Module (same number).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 10
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
Insolvency Administration Course Map

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 11
Roles and responsibilities
Who does what
The content of this course is customized for insolvency administrators working in the office of
a Licensed Insolvency Trustee.
Directive 4, published by the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (“OSB”) spells out
the circumstances in which Trustees may delegate tasks to another individual in their office.
This course does not attempt to differentiate which tasks are permitted and commonly
performed by staff of the Trustee (i.e., insolvency administrators like you), since Trustee
practices vary among companies, depending on their size, location, markets served, etc. This
course may state that the Trustee is the person completing a specific task when the task is
actually performed by a staff member of the Trustee’s office.
Whether or not the staff member is asked to do each of these tasks depends on the
company, management, training, and his/her professional development as well as the
limitations of Directive 4. The underlying principle however, is that the Trustee remains
responsible for the administration being completed professionally and in a timely manner.
Use of “you”
When the pronoun “you” is used in this course, it does not necessarily mean you
personally—it means either the Trustee or the Insolvency Administrator.
Disclaimer / Rules of the Road
1. While we are committed to gender equality, we have sacrificed the goal of using gender
neutral language in this course material to keep the text grammatically simple. So, for
example, references to insolvency professionals that are in the singular are generally
third person masculine (in other words, “he” rather than “he or she”).
2. The material in the CQP program can be time sensitive. Notwithstanding all of the efforts
of the professionals involved in the preparation and review of these notes, some errors
may be present. You should review the material carefully with your sponsor, with a
critical thinking approach and bring to the attention of the sponsors and CAIRP any
material that is not clear.
3. The Office of the Superintendent (“OSB”) Directives are described in the text in generic
terms. It is up to you to research and become familiar with the latest versions of these
directives. For example, the Directive on Surplus Income is referred to in the text as
Directive 11R and not as Directive 11R2.
4. A deliberate decision has been made in the preparation of the course materials to refer
only to sections of the legislation, such as the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (“BIA”) and
the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act (“CCAA”), and not to subsections. The intent
is to encourage you to read all parts of the acts and not just specific sections so that the
relevant provisions can be looked at in context.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 12
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
1. Introduction to Insolvency

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 13
Table of Contents
1. INTRODUCTION TO INSOLVENCY ... 12
1.1. Introduction ...15
1.1.1. Philosophy ...15
1.1.2. What is insolvency? ...16
1.1.3. Who is the Trustee?...16
1.2. Rules of conduct and ethics ...16
1.2.1. Ethics ...16
1.3. History of statutes and the profession ...17
1.4. Current legislation ...18
1.4.1. Legislative framework ...18
1.5. Typical appointments and your role ...19
1.5.1. Licensed Insolvency Trustee: ...19
1.5.2. Administrator of a Consumer Proposal: ...19
1.5.3. Insolvency Counsellor: ...20
1.5.4. Receiver: ...20
1.5.5. Receiver Manager: ...20
1.5.6. Interim Receiver: ...20
1.5.7. Liquidator: ...21
1.5.8. Monitor: ...21
1.6. Key Organizations...21
1.6.1. Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (OSB) ...21
1.6.2. OSB directives ...22
1.6.3. Canadian Association of Insolvency and Restructuring Professionals
(“Association” or “CAIRP”) ...22

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 14
1.7. Ethics and professionalism ...23
1.7.1. Conflicts of Interest Rules ...23
1.7.2. Handling of Trust Funds ...23
1.8. Public trust and policy ...23
1.8.1. Reputation ...23
1.8.2. Dealing with the public ...24
1.8.3. Confidentiality ...24

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 15
1.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Describe the various roles a Trustee can or cannot accept.
 Explain how Trustees receive their designations, how they are licensed and by whom.
 Know and understand the rules governing a Trustee’s behaviour (and those in his
employ) allowing you to adhere strictly to them.
 Understand that there are various provincial and federal legislations which impact the
day-to-day administration of estates.
Assigned reading
 BIA s. 2, 13.3-13.5, 16-38, 161 and 178
 BIA Rules 34-53
 Directive 5 - Estate Funds and Banking
 CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct; CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice
1.1.1. Philosophy
Bankruptcy and insolvency legislation has the following primary goals:
 Financial rehabilitation: to allow an honest but unfortunate debtor the ability to obtain a
fresh start unfettered by an insurmountable debt load; to obtain a discharge from his
debts on reasonable conditions;
 Compromise: to facilitate a process whereby an individual or a business can discuss a
settlement of an unmanageable debt load with the creditors to avoid bankruptcy and the
resulting loss of value and social impacts, by compelling creditors to act collectively rather
than individually;
 Collective process: to provide for an orderly and fair distribution of available proceeds to
the creditors in an equitable manner;
 Investigation: to provide a forum to carry out an investigation into the affairs and
transactions of the insolvent person; and
 Confidence: to assist the credit granting system by promoting confidence of all the
stakeholders in the insolvency process.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 16
1.1.2. What is insolvency?
While the terms bankruptcy and insolvency are often used interchangeably, in fact, they are
not one and the same. A person who is bankrupt is usually insolvent, but an insolvent person
is not always bankrupt.
A bankrupt person has either filed an assignment in bankruptcy or has been petitioned into
bankruptcy by a creditor and is now subject to the provisions of the BIA.
Insolvency is the financial situation a person finds himself in when he is unable to pay his
debts when they are due, or has ceased making payments, or his liabilities exceed the value
of his assets.
The BIA is a rehabilitative act that offers an insolvent person an opportunity to be released
from his debts. It also offers creditors an orderly wind-up and distribution of a bankrupt’s
realizable assets.
1.1.3. Who is the Trustee?
A Trustee is an officer of the court who owes a duty of care to all stakeholders.
A Trustee operates in a position of trust and must maintain a high standard of ethics in the
administration of his duties.
A Trustee can delegate certain duties, but is ultimately responsible for all actions taken by
individuals under his supervision.
There is an inherent conflict of interest in the role of the Trustee as the Trustee has
obligations to both the creditors and the debtor. Both the Office of the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy and CAIRP have established codes of conduct to address these conflicts and
ensure that the insolvency process remains transparent.
1.2. Rules of conduct and ethics
BIA Rules 34-53
CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct; CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice
1.2.1. Ethics
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy is responsible for overseeing estates administered under
the BIA and has established a Code of Ethics that is set out in the BIA.
This code, together with the BIA and the Directives, deals with the competency and integrity
of Trustees and establishes standards of care required in the administration of the estates
and the operation of an insolvency practice.
CAIRP also issues Rules of Professional Conduct and has established the Standards of
Professional Practice that are found on the CAIRP website, www.cairp.ca.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 17
These codes of conduct establish standards that deal not only with trustees but also with
other parties, e.g., receivers, agents, or liquidators involved in the insolvency and
restructuring process.
1.3. History of statutes and the profession
Bankruptcy legislation was first enacted in Canada shortly after Confederation. Aside from
the period between 1880 and 1919 there has been some form of legislation in place. On July
1, 1950, the Bankruptcy Act came into force. This allowed for the filing of proposals by nonbankrupt individuals, as well as a provision for the administration of summary estates1.
In November 1992 significant amendments were made and the act was renamed the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. Further amendments to the Act came into force in 1997 and
1998. The most recent amendments came into force in July 2008 and September 2009.
Other Acts that regulate bankruptcy and insolvency in Canada include:
 Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act (CCAA)
 Enacted in 1933.
 Provides for the financial restructuring of a company or related group of companies
with debts of more than $5,000,000 under court supervision.
 Winding-up and Restructuring Act (WURA)
 Enacted in 1882.
 Provides for the winding-up of insolvent banks, insurance companies and trust
companies under a liquidator. These companies are excluded from utilizing the
provisions of the BIA.
 Farm Debt Mediation Act (FDMA)
 Enacted in 1998.
 Provides for the restructuring of insolvent commercial farmers under an Administrator
appointed by the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food.

1 An estate in which, at the time of filing, unencumbered, realizable assets are valued at $15,000 or less. Certain provisions of
the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act are waived in order to reduce administration time and costs.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 18
1.4. Current legislation
1.4.1. Legislative framework
The Parliament of Canada has exclusive jurisdiction over bankruptcy and insolvency matters
and the BIA is federal legislation that is applicable across the country.
The BIA is broken down into 13 parts. Also, the Bankruptcy and Insolvency General Rules,
Eligible Financial Contract General Rules and Orderly Payment of Debts Regulations
complete the BIA by providing more information on matters that are more administrative or
procedural. Directives and Circulars are issued by the Superintendent of Bankruptcy and help
interpret the provisions of the BIA or provide practice notes designed to make the
administration of estates more uniform. Finally, jurisprudence completes the legislation by
providing interpretations of the provisions that are useful in administering estates.
Other federal legislation that can impact on the BIA includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
 Income Tax Act
 Excise Tax Act
 Canada Pension Plan Act
 Employment Insurance Act
 Bank Act
 Canada Business Corporations Act
Provincial legislation that impacts the BIA includes, but is not limited to the following:
 Exemptions/Execution Act
 Landlord and Tenant Act
 Fraudulent Conveyances Act
 Assignment & Preferences Act
 Personal Property Security Act
 Employment Standards Act
 Workers Compensation Act
 Labour Relations Act
 Pension Benefits Act
 Family Law Act
 Retail/Harmonized Sales Tax Act

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 19
 Municipal Act
 Public Utilities Act
 Partnership Act
 Creditors Relief Act
 Construction/Builders Lien Act
 Conditional Sales Act
 Civil Enforcement Act
 Insurance Act
 In Quebec, the Civil Code; Code of Civil Procedure; Tax Administration Act
The individual provinces have jurisdiction over property and civil rights legislation.
The provisions of the BIA are subject to provincial legislation involving property and civil
rights as long as the legislation does not conflict with it.
1.5. Typical appointments and your role
1.5.1. Licensed Insolvency Trustee:
 holds a licence as a Licensed Insolvency Trustee issued by the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy after qualifying under the procedures set out in the Trustee Licensing
Directive;
 must complete a financial assessment of the debtor’s circumstances and provide him with
the various options available;
 has a duty of care to both the debtor and the creditors and must remain impartial while
completing the administration of the estate;
 once appointed, must carry out his duties in an honest and competent manner and must
provide full and accurate information to all the stakeholders in the insolvency process;
and
 is not required to accept an appointment in respect of any particular bankrupt estate but
having accepted the appointment, he cannot withdraw.
1.5.2. Administrator of a Consumer Proposal:
 must be either a Licensed Insolvency Trustee or an individual appointed by the
Superintendent of Bankruptcy to administer a consumer proposal;
 must assess the debtor’s financial situation and assist in the preparation and filing of the
proposal and other statutory documents as required under the BIA; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 20
 is responsible for monitoring the payments made under the proposal and ensuring that
the dividends are issued to the creditors according to the provisions of the BIA.
1.5.3. Insolvency Counsellor:
 provides counseling to individuals who file an assignment in bankruptcy or make a
consumer proposal as they must attend two counselling sessions that are provided for by
the Trustee or the Administrator;
 must be meet the criteria outlined in Directive 1R, including obtaining the qualifications
and skills to provide financial counseling through the Practical Course in Insolvency
Counselling (PCIC); and
 must provide information to the debtor regarding consumer and credit education as well
as identification of road blocks to solvency and rehabilitation pursuant to Directive 1R.
1.5.4. Receiver:
BIA s. 243-252
 must be a Licensed Insolvency Trustee;
 can be appointed privately by a secured creditor, pursuant to a security instrument, or
can be court-appointed;
 will take possession and sell the assets pledged as security for the benefit of the secured
creditor after the debtor has defaulted under the terms of the agreement;
 does not have the authority to continue to operate a debtor’s business; and
 must comply with BIA sections 243-252.
1.5.5. Receiver Manager:
BIA s. 243-252
 is usually appointed pursuant to the terms of a security instrument but can also be courtappointed;
 will take possession and sell the debtor’s property subject to the security agreement;
 has the authority to continue operation of the debtor’s business; and
 must comply with BIA sections 243-252.
1.5.6. Interim Receiver:
BIA s. 46 and 47
 appointed by the court to preserve and protect the assets of a debtor.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 21
 must be a Licensed Insolvency Trustee;
 appointed when a creditor has a legitimate concern that the assets of the debtor could be
at risk during a time period when he is unable to exercise his rights or when it is useful
and convenient to do so to protect the estate of the debtor or the interests of the creditors
in the context of a restructuring proceeding; and
 may be appointed during a petition in bankruptcy proceeding, a notice of intention to
make a proposal, a notice of intention to enforce security or (in certain circumstances)
during a CCAA proceeding.
1.5.7. Liquidator:
 appointed by either the court or shareholders to wind up a company, pursuant to a court
order or the relevant legislation.
1.5.8. Monitor:
 appointed by a secured creditor to conduct a review a debtor’s financial situation when a
secured creditor has a concern as to the viability of the debtor’s continued operation; can
also be appointed pursuant to the terms of a CCAA application to assist the debtor during
its restructuring process and to advise the court; or
 is a Trustee, appointed in a Division I proposal, required to monitor the operation of the
debtor’s business until either court approval of the proposal or the bankruptcy of the
debtor.
In the case of a monitor appointed by a secured creditor to review the on-going activities, the
monitor does not operate the debtor’s business and is there only with the consent of the
debtor.
In the case of a monitor appointed by the court in a CCAA proceeding or a Trustee
monitoring the activities during a proposal proceeding, the Trustee/monitor must report any
adverse material changes to the court and the Superintendent of Bankruptcy.
1.6. Key Organizations
1.6.1. Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (OSB)
BIA s. 5
The Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (OSB) is a special operating agency of
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada and operates bankruptcy districts
throughout Canada.
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy is appointed by an order in council and heads the OSB.
He is responsible to oversee all estates administered under the BIA.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 22
He is also responsible to license, supervise and discipline Licensed Insolvency Trustees, as
per statutes and directives.
The OSB is mandated to “maintain investor and lender confidence in the Canadian
marketplace by protecting the integrity of the bankruptcy and insolvency system.”
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy delegates specific duties to various different levels.
These delegates are Official Receivers, Assistant Bankruptcy Analysts, Bankruptcy Analysts,
and Senior Bankruptcy Analysts.
1.6.2. OSB directives
From time to time, the Superintendent of Bankruptcy issues directives to aid in the
administration of the BIA.
These directives carry the same statutory authority as the BIA. Failure to comply with these
directives can have serious consequences for a Trustee.
1.6.3. Canadian Association of Insolvency and Restructuring Professionals
(“Association” or “CAIRP”)
The Association is a national organization of professionals established in 1979 to assist,
educate and support its members in their various insolvency roles.
The Mission Statement of the Association is:
advance the interests of members and the public by:
 promoting excellence amongst members,
 providing relevant professional development,
 establishing and enforcing CAIRP’s Rules of Professional Conduct and Standards of
Professional Practice,
 maintaining rigorous certification standards and providing innovative education to
aspiring insolvency and restructuring professionals, and
 advocating for a fair, transparent and effective insolvency and restructuring system
throughout Canada.

The Association works closely with the Superintendent of Bankruptcy in establishing rules
and standards to maintain a high standard of ethics in the insolvency system.
The Association has developed the Chartered Insolvency and Restructuring Professional
Qualification Program (CQP). Once a candidate has completed the program and passed the
final exam (CNIE) he may be admitted as a member of CAIRP and receive a designation as
a Chartered Insolvency & Restructuring Professional (CIRP). In order to become a Licensed

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 23
Insolvency Trustee, an individual must complete the CQP and then must challenge the Oral
Boards, which are organized by the OSB.
1.7. Ethics and professionalism
1.7.1. Conflicts of Interest Rules
CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct; CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice
The Trustee often finds himself in a situation of competing interests. Advice he gives to one
party may adversely affect another. The Trustee must always remember that he has
obligations to many stakeholders in the insolvency process including the bankrupt and the
creditors.
On occasion, the Trustee may have a relationship with a creditor or a debtor through
previous business dealings. The BIA details situations where the Trustee is not qualified to
act or may act only if he complies with certain requirements.
A Trustee is an officer of the court and at all times must be independent of any influence that
might affect, or appear to affect, the administration of an estate. Both the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy and the CAIRP have developed guidelines relating to conflict of interest issues.
1.7.2. Handling of Trust Funds
All receipts collected by a Trustee during the administration of an estate are held in trust for
the benefit of the creditors.
The BIA, including the rules and directives, and CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct and
Standards of Professional Practice, provide the requirements for control and proper record
keeping of these funds.
1.8. Public trust and policy
1.8.1. Reputation
A Trustee must be of good character and reputation as he is placed in a position of trust.
He must maintain a high standard of care in the administration of the insolvency process to
uphold public confidence.
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy, in the directive regarding Trustee licensing, details the
minimum standard required to become licensed as Trustee. This includes the possibility of a
complete investigation into a candidate’s character and qualifications.
CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct and Standards of Professional Practice also detail
minimum standards of conduct to ensure the integrity of the insolvency system.
The Trustee is subject to the scrutiny of the stakeholders in the insolvency system and must
always conduct himself with integrity and due care.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 24
1.8.2. Dealing with the public
Adhering to the CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct and Standards of Professional
Practice ensures consistent application of the BIA and instills confidence in the system.
1.8.3. Confidentiality
There is no solicitor – client privilege between a Trustee and a debtor. That does not mean
however that all information that the Trustee receives is necessarily public. The Trustee has
an obligation to maintain the confidentiality of information that is personal, privileged,
confidential or sensitive. Information disclosed by the debtor pertaining to his property,
earnings, transactions, dealings, etc., however, must be provided to the creditors when
dealing with the affairs of the debtor.
The BIA rules and CAIRP rules prohibit a Trustee from disclosing confidential information to
the public unless required by law or with the permission of the debtor.
The Trustee cannot use confidential information to benefit himself or any third party.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 25
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
2. Assess Debtor’s Financial Situation

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 26
Table of Contents
2. ASSESS DEBTOR’S FINANCIAL SITUATION ... 25
2.1. Introduction ...28
2.2. Assessment ...28
2.2.1. Definition of Assessment ...28
2.3. Conducting the assessment interview ...29
2.3.1. Purpose ...29
2.3.2. Interview techniques ...29
2.3.3. The need for understanding the relationship between the debtor and any
business he may be involved in, or may have shares in ...30
2.3.4. Debtor must be insolvent to file an assignment in bankruptcy or a proposal 31
2.3.5. Minimum documentation requirements ...31
2.3.6. Initial steps to commence legal proceedings under the BIA ...32
2.4. Alternate courses of action ...33
2.4.1. Overview ...33
2.4.2. Non-legislative debt settlement arrangements ...33
2.4.3. Orderly payment of debts ...33
2.4.4. Ordinary bankruptcy vs. summary bankruptcy ...34
2.4.5. Conversion of summary administration to ordinary administration ...34
2.4.6. Proposals ...35
2.4.7. Division I proposal vs. consumer proposal ...35
2.5. Brief introduction to insolvency concepts ...38
2.5.1. Duties of the debtor ...38
2.5.2. Counselling ...38
2.5.3. Contributions from earnings (surplus income) ...39

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 27
2.5.4. Mediation ...39
2.5.5. Assets ...40

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 28
2.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Assess the financial situation of the debtor.
 Explain the alternatives available to a debtor.
 Explain the debtor’s duties and the repercussions if he does not comply.
 Describe the requirements of the counseling sessions.
Assigned reading
 BIA s. 26(1), 67, 68, 155 - 159, 178 and 198 - 200
 BIA Form 65
 BIA Rules 68 and 105
 Directives 1R, 6R, 11R, 16R and 23
2.2. Assessment
2.2.1. Definition of Assessment
Directive 6R
Assessment is the first stage of the insolvency process, providing for a financial appraisal
interview, a description of statutory and non-statutory options available to an individual debtor
and a discussion and review with that debtor of the merits and consequences of each of the
options available.
Careful questioning to clarify facts with respect to their situation, combined with your
understanding of the BIA, will result in your being able to assist the Trustee in the
assessment process.
When a debtor is seeking a solution to his financial problems, the Trustee must perform an
assessment. Although only Trustees and Administrators of consumer proposals are
authorized to provide the assessment, registered individuals may be authorized to provide
part of the assessment.
Directive 6R is an important directive that sets out all the standards that a Trustee, or
someone designated by him, must adhere to in carrying out the assessment. As this is the
first encounter with the debtor, complying with this directive will ensure he has received the
appropriate information to be able to make an informed choice.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 29
Every debtor must have an assessment and at the end of the assessment, both the Trustee
and the debtor must sign a copy of the assessment certificate. The certificate is to be filed
with the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy and a file copy is retained by the Trustee.
The certificate will indicate what option under the BIA the debtor has chosen and whether the
debtor has sought advice from other persons in the last six months or not.
If the Trustee is of the opinion that the debtor could have filed a viable proposal but elects to
file a bankruptcy, he must inform the debtor that this will have to be reported in the Report of
Trustee on Bankrupt’s Application for Discharge. This will prompt a mediation process. If this
procedure is unsuccessful, a hearing in court on the debtor’s discharge will take place.
2.3. Conducting the assessment interview
2.3.1. Purpose
During the interview all relevant information pertaining to the debtor is obtained and many
Trustees use standardized forms to collect this information. These forms must be properly
completed and maintained on file for future reference.
Although much of the information on the original standardized information collection form will
be transferred onto the formal Statement of Affairs, other information will only be found in this
standardized form. As an example, it may be beneficial in the original form to gather
information that will be required for purposes of filing the bankrupt's tax returns.
Information contained in the original form can support the Trustee's position that relevant
information was passed on to the bankrupt. As an example, a notation in the original form
that alimony was discussed as a non-dischargeable debt would negate any future claims by
the bankrupt that he was not advised of this information.
2.3.2. Interview techniques
Conduct the interview in a co-operative manner. You are there to obtain all information that is
helpful and required by you to assist the debtor make an informed decision. Be open, honest,
encouraging, understanding and non-judgemental.
This is the first time the debtor is being introduced to many insolvency terms, so it is very
important to make sure the debtor understands these concepts. You should ask the debtor to
demonstrate his understanding by asking him to describe, in his own words, the area that you
just covered. If there is a language barrier, arrange to have an interpreter present.
After the interview you need to prepare, based on information obtained from the debtor, a
complete statement of the debtor's financial affairs including details of:
 the debtor's assets;
 the debtor's liabilities;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 30
 a detailed current monthly income and expense statement, including all income, gross
and net; and all expenses, including special needs expenses, alimony, support or
maintenance payments, transportation costs, medical and prescription expenses; and
 conveyances, preferences and transfers at undervalue of real or personal property of the
debtor.
Research the following factors to help you determine a course of action under the BIA:
 whether the debtor has sufficient property available to make a "lump sum payment"
proposal;
 whether the debtor has surplus income and also has the capacity at the time of
assessment to sustain continued payments to a proposal for a period of time;
 the family or personal situation of the debtor;
 the financial situation of the debtor;
 the number and type of creditors of the debtor, both secured and unsecured;
 the likelihood of acceptance of a proposal by the creditors; and
 whether the return to creditors from a potential proposal would be greater than the return
from a bankruptcy.
2.3.3. The need for understanding the relationship between the debtor and
any business he may be involved in, or may have shares in
You may discover that the debtor is involved in a business or has an investment in a
company. You will need to obtain additional facts about the business (i.e., most recent
financial statements, tax liability, names of business creditors, debts for which the debtor has
a personal guarantee, etc.). You must have or acquire general business knowledge to ask
the right questions and understand how the answers impact on the debtor’s position.
All debts from an unincorporated business are personal debts. They will form part of the list
of creditors. The debtor is also liable for debts from an incorporated business if the debtor
has personally guaranteed the debt or if the debtor is a director and the debt attributes
liability to the directors (e.g. GST/HST and source deductions). In the event that the debtor
has personally guaranteed corporate creditors, those creditors will be included in the
personal bankruptcy estate.
The investment in a company may mean a majority ownership or a partial ownership of a
company by way of shares. This investment will form part of the assets of the debtor. You
need to advise the debtor as to how the shares would be affected in each of the options that
you provide to him. Pursuant to the Canada Business Corporations Act, a person cannot be a
director of a corporation if bankrupt so the company could be impacted if there is only one
director.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 31
These factors could drastically affect the choice of filing a bankruptcy or a proposal and also
affect the value of the company that the Trustee must state on the Statement of Affairs.
2.3.4. Debtor must be insolvent to file an assignment in bankruptcy or a
proposal
BIA s. 2
While obtaining information about the debtor’s assets and liabilities, determine if the debtor is
insolvent. An individual must be insolvent to file any proceedings under the BIA.
An insolvent person is defined by BIA s. 2
2.3.5. Minimum documentation requirements
BIA s. 26; BIA Rule 68
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No: 6
Directives 16R 17 and 32
The Trustee is required to maintain proper accounting and documentation for each estate
administered by his office. This is set out in BIA s. 26.
Unless the court otherwise orders, these records are to be maintained for four years after the
date of the Trustee’s discharge (or whatever time period is prescribed2).
Estate records are often maintained in separate files covering:
 Banking;
 Correspondence;
 Minutes of meetings of creditors or inspectors;
 Income Tax;
 Proofs of Claim; and
 Official Documents.
The Statement of Affairs is one of the most important documents for the administration of the
estate and one on which a variety of users base their decisions. Accordingly, it is important to

2 You will see this expression “as prescribed” fairly often in the text. It means that the legislator wanted to leave some discretion
for the government to make changes to limits that are set in the legislation, and has chosen to allow the limits to be set by the
rules or regulations instead. So when you see that an amount or a period is “X or as may be prescribed” it is necessary to check
in the Rules or Regulations to the legislation to see if the Rules or regulations provide for a different amount or period.
Essentially, “as prescribed” means it is as specified in the Rules or Regulations. The reason for this is that it is much easier for
the government to change a Rule or Regulation than it is to amend the legislation.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 32
give as much information as possible in order to accurately reflect the bankrupt's affairs.
Directive 16R, “Preparation of the Statement of Affairs,” and CAIRP’s Standard of
Professional Practice No: 6, “Preparation and Verification of Statement of Affairs”, provides
the guidance needed to adequately prepare this document.
Copies of all information sent to the Official Receiver and provided to the bankrupt are to be
maintained in the estate file.
Directive 32 allows for electronic recordkeeping of the estate records under specified
conditions. Generally, the electronic estate records must “ensure the accessibility,
authenticity, integrity, reliability, readability and perennity of the information recorded therein.”
2.3.6. Initial steps to commence legal proceedings under the BIA
After the initial assessment and after all of the necessary information has been obtained, the
formal documentation will be prepared for filing with the Official Receiver. These documents
will vary depending upon the type of proceedings, but typically will include:
 Assignment for General Benefit of Creditors (if bankruptcy);
 a copy of the proposal or notice of intention to file a proposal (if proposal) or a copy of the
consumer proposal (if proposal under Division II of Part III of the BIA);
 a Statement of Affairs (except in the case of the filing of a notice of intention);
 a list of creditors;
 the Estate Information Summary;
 Form 65 – Monthly Income and Expense Statement; and
 an Assessment Certificate.
Once these documents are filed with and accepted by the Official Receiver, the debtor has
legally filed an assignment in bankruptcy or has commenced a proposal process and is now
bound by the BIA.
It is critical that the debtor understand that once the documents are signed and filed,
changing his mind can have very dire consequences. Once a bankruptcy is filed, it cannot be
withdrawn. Once a Division I proposal process is filed, it cannot be withdrawn, and any
insufficiency or missed deadline in the process is likely to result in bankruptcy. A consumer
proposal can be withdrawn prior to (deemed) court approval, but that withdrawal may affect
the ability to obtain a stay of proceedings if a subsequent consumer proposal is filed.
After all documents have been prepared and signed, it is important to ensure that the
bankrupt retains the following information:
 acknowledgement of receipt of notice to bankrupt;
 acknowledgement of surplus income obligations;
 a copy of any guarantee of costs related to the bankruptcy; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 33
 a statement for purposes of recording monthly income and expenses.
Module 3 will explain the administration of a bankruptcy in more detail. Module 4 and Module
5 will explain the administration of proposals in more detail.
2.4. Alternate courses of action
2.4.1. Overview
An assignment in bankruptcy is not appropriate for everyone in financial difficulty. In a
bankruptcy, all assets owned by the debtor, except certain assets that are exempt from
seizure, will be realized upon by the Trustee and the proceeds distributed equally to his
creditors. The Administrator should be familiar with other options that may be available to the
debtor and inform the debtor accordingly.
2.4.2. Non-legislative debt settlement arrangements
If the debtor is able, he may be able to contact his creditors and work out a repayment
arrangement with each separate creditor. This takes a significant amount of time and
requires willingness to hold these discussions in a co-operative manner. Most creditors are
willing to accept some form of reasonable repayment schedules.
Another possibility is for the debtor to arrange for a debt consolidation loan from the debtor’s
bank. If approved, all the debtor’s debts will be paid off and replaced with one large
consolidated loan. This loan will have specific terms of repayments, over a longer period of
time that may be more manageable to the debtor. This will stop the many creditor/collection
calls from the individual creditors and may reduce the interest charges incurred by the debtor,
as the interest on the loan may be lower than the interest charged by the consumer credit
granting organizations such as credit card companies.
In both arrangements, the debtor will keep his assets.
2.4.3. Orderly payment of debts
BIA, Part X
Another alternative for a debtor in some provinces3 is to obtain a Consolidation Order under
Part X of the BIA. The Consolidation Order allows a debtor to pay off his debts over three
years. It sets out the amount and the times when payments are due to the court and the court
will distribute the payments to the creditors. Unlike in bankruptcy, the debtor will not lose his
assets. Consolidation Orders are available in Alberta, Saskatchewan, Prince Edward Island
or Nova Scotia.

3 Candidates are encouraged to determine if their province offers the Orderly payment of Debts (“OPD”) program or a voluntary
payment scheme (colloquially referred to as the “Loi Lacombe” in Quebec).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 34
2.4.4. Ordinary bankruptcy vs. summary bankruptcy
BIA s. 155-157
No one who is insolvent is precluded from filing a bankruptcy, provided he is not already an
undischarged bankrupt. A debtor may even file bankruptcy multiple times (although each
subsequent bankruptcy may be longer than the previous bankruptcy and obtaining credit
afterwards may be problematic). Once a debtor has decided to file an assignment in
bankruptcy, the Trustee will file the official bankruptcy documents as either a summary
administration or an ordinary administration. The only impact to the bankrupt is that in a
summary administration, a notice of bankruptcy is not published in a newspaper where he
lives.
The distinction, however, is important to the Trustee as the type of administration determines
which set of rules the Trustee is to follow and how the Trustee calculates and withdraws his
fees.
A summary administration is only available in respect of individual bankrupts (not
corporations) where the estimated net realizable value of the assets of the bankrupt will not
exceed $15,000 (or such other amount as is prescribed).
An ordinary administration is how all business bankruptcies are filed and how individual
bankruptcies are filed if the estimated net realizable value of the assets of the bankrupt will
exceed $15,000. The difference between the two types of filings is the reduction of the cost of
administering a summary administration file (since it has fewer assets to pay for these costs).
Sections of the BIA set out the tasks that either do not have to be completed or are
streamlined in a summary administration, including:
 certain notices can be combined into one notice;
 notices can be sent by regular, not registered, mail;
 a first meeting of creditors is not mandatory unless creditors request such a meeting;
 no publication of the notice of bankruptcy in a newspaper is required unless ordered by
the court; and
 a separate bank account need not be opened by the Trustee.
In addition, the manner in which the fees of the Trustee are calculated and withdrawn from
the estate differ from that under an ordinary administration.
Module 6 discusses summary vs. ordinary administration in more detail.
2.4.5. Conversion of summary administration to ordinary administration
BIA s. 49 and Circular 2R
There may be situations where, after the filing of an assignment as a summary
administration, it becomes apparent that there will be extraordinary time or disbursements

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 35
incurred in the administration. It is proper for the Trustee to recover such costs through the
conversion of the estate from a summary to an ordinary administration.
The process to convert the status of an estate has these stages:
1. The Trustee will make an application in writing to the Official Receiver advising of the
receipts and reason for the conversion request.
2. The Official Receiver, if he feels it is warranted, may approve the request.
3. Once the Official Receiver agrees with the conversion of the estate, the Trustee must
adhere to the normal requirements for ordinary administrations (i.e., taxing of accounts)
unless otherwise directed.
2.4.6. Proposals
A proposal is an agreement between a debtor and his creditors and usually involves the
unsecured creditors agreeing to accept something less than 100% of their outstanding
accounts, or to grant additional time to make payment, or both. Generally, proposals may be
used when a debtor recognizes that he can afford to pay a portion of the debts, but not all
and not right away. In a proposal, the debtor retains his assets, but proposes to pay his
creditors a reasonable amount over a period of time. Normally the debtor can make these
payments from future earnings combined with the sale of selected assets if the debtor so
chooses. It is important to note that there is no set rule as to how a proposal is designed and
from what sources the payments are made. This depends on the imagination of the person
drafting the proposal, public policy (because the proposal should not purport to do something
that is illegal or immoral) and what is acceptable to the creditors. For example, the debtor’s
proposal could be financed from future earnings, sales of assets, new loans, money
contributed by a family member, etc., or a combination of sources. Usually the proposal will
require a greater dividend to creditors than that which they would receive should the debtor
file an assignment in bankruptcy.
The debtor must be insolvent to file a proposal.
Just as there are two different types of bankruptcies, there are two types of proposals.
Division I proposals and consumer proposals, also known as Division II proposals (named as
such because the consumer proposal provisions are found in Division II of Part III of the BIA,
while the “regular” proposal provisions are found in Division I of Part III of the BIA). The type
of proposal available to a debtor is dependent upon whether or not the debtor is an individual
and on the estimated total of his debts (excluding a mortgage on a principal residence).
The debtor needs to carefully decide which proposal to file, as there are risks and benefits to
each type.
2.4.7. Division I proposal vs. consumer proposal
A Division I proposal is available to any natural person (i.e., a human being) and to all
corporations, regardless of the amount of debt owing to creditors.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 36
A consumer (Division II) proposal is available only to a natural person whose aggregate
debts, excluding any debts secured by the person's principal residence, do not exceed
$250,000 or such other maximum as is prescribed. Corporations cannot file a consumer
proposal.
An individual may choose between filing a Division I and a consumer proposal (provided, of
course, that he meets the criterion for a consumer proposal).
During your interview, you may discuss the differences between the two types of proposals
and the risks and benefits of each type. See the table below for more details.
Comparison of proposal types
NOTE: The details of a Division I vs. consumer proposal are discussed in more detail in
Module 4 and Module 5.
Common debtor
question
Division I proposal answer Consumer proposal answer
Do I need to attend
mandatory
counselling
sessions?
No Yes
Can I change my
mind after filing a
proposal and
request that it be
withdrawn?
No – there is no possibility of
backtracking without special
permission from the court. If
the proposal is not filed or not
accepted, a bankruptcy
occurs.
You can withdraw the proposal
prior to court approval or deemed
court approval, however, if you
make another proposal within 6
months, the stay provisions will
not apply.
Do I need to attend
a creditors’ meeting?

Yes, a creditors’ meeting
must be held for creditors to
vote on the proposal.
Yes. But a meeting will only be
held if creditors with an aggregate
of at least 25% of the value of
proven claims have so requested.
What happens if
creditors reject the
proposal?

There is an automatic
bankruptcy. The Trustee will
then realize upon all nonexempt assets owned by you
for distribution to your
creditors.
There is no automatic bankruptcy
but the rights of the creditors
revive and they will seek full
payment. You can make another
consumer proposal (but there
may not be a stay of proceedings)
or you can decide to make an
assignment in bankruptcy. There
are other options, but without the
benefit of the extensive protection

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 37
from creditors that arises from the
stay.
Common debtor
question
Division I proposal answer Consumer proposal answer
How is the proposal
accepted?

Proposal is accepted if, out of
the creditors with proven
claims voting in each class, a
majority of creditors, holding
at least 2/3 of the dollar value
of the claims votes ‘yes’ (i.e.,
two conditions, majority in
number and 2/3 in value,
applied only to those who
decide to vote).

Proposal is deemed to be
accepted if there is no creditor
meeting; OR
If a meeting is required, the
proposal is accepted if the
majority of creditors, based on
dollar value of claim, vote in
favour of the proposal at the
meeting (i.e., one condition,
simple majority calculated based
on 1 vote per $ of claim, applied
only to those who decide to vote).
How does the
proposal become
binding on all
creditors?
A court hearing must be held
to obtain court approval.

The proposal is deemed accepted
by the court 15 days after creditor
approval, unless a creditor, the
Official Receiver or the
Administrator requests a review
by the court.
If a review is requested, a court
hearing must be held to obtain
court approval.
What happens if I
can’t make the
payments after the
proposal is
accepted?

If you default, there is an
opportunity to remedy the
default within 30 days, or
such longer period as is
approved by the inspectors or
the creditors. If the default is
not remedied within that
delay, the proposal is
officially in default and the
creditors or the Trustee can
make application to the court
to annul the proposal. This
will result in the deemed
bankruptcy of the debtor.

If you default, the proposal is
annulled and the creditors’ rights
revive. They can seek full
payment, plus interest, of the debt
owing, less any dividends
received in the proposal.
Administrators have discretion to
revive a consumer proposal that
would otherwise be deemed
annulled, however, creditors
retain the right to object to the
revival. Furthermore, application
may be made to court to revive
the proposal. There is no
automatic bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 38

2.5. Brief introduction to insolvency concepts
2.5.1. Duties of the debtor
BIA s. 158, 159, and 198 – 200
In most instances, debtors contemplating bankruptcy will not be familiar with the bankruptcy
process, their rights in bankruptcy, or their duties and responsibilities as bankrupts. You need
to inform the debtor of all relevant information to enable them to make an informed decision.
Debtors filing proposals have duties to perform even though they have not filed an
assignment in bankruptcy. These duties are the same as the duties of a bankrupt, insofar as
they are applicable in the context of the particular proposal (for example, an obligation to help
the Trustee realize on the property of the bankrupt would not apply to a proposal unless the
proposal provides for the Trustee realizing on property).
If a debtor fails to comply with his duties, that fact will be taken into consideration and might
prevent him from getting an automatic discharge from bankruptcy, or having the proposal
completed. It is critical that the debtors are properly informed and understand their duties and
rights under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.
Immediately before the debtor, whether consumer or corporate, files an assignment in
bankruptcy or a proposal, he should be given a copy of "Notice to Bankrupts and Officers of a
Bankrupt Corporation with Regard to Their Duties and Status”. If need be, the document
should be explained to the debtor, since the document is to be signed by the debtor to
confirm it has been received and understood. The signed original notice should be
maintained on file and a copy given to the debtor.
2.5.2. Counselling
Directive 1R
In order to be eligible for an automatic discharge, or to obtain a Certificate of Full
Performance in a Division II proposal, the debtor must attend two counselling sessions. The
first counselling session deals with budgeting with the debtor developing a realistic budget
and discussing expense tracking strategies. The second counselling session covers financial
goal-setting, spending habits and the responsible use of credit. The requirements are set out
in Directive 1R –“Counselling in Insolvency Matters”.
After each session, both the Trustee (or the BIA counselor registered under the LIT’s license
) and the debtor sign a Report on Insolvency Counselling to acknowledge the session was
completed. These reports are submitted to the OSB.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 39
2.5.3. Contributions from earnings (surplus income)
BIA Form 65
Directive 11R
A common question that bankrupts ask is, “What happens to the wages I earn from my job
now that I am bankrupt?”
All wages earned by the bankrupt after filing an assignment in bankruptcy will continue to go
directly to the bankrupt. His pay cheque will continue to be deposited into his bank account or
in whatever manner he receives his pay. However, there is a requirement that the bankrupt
must contribute some of these earnings, each month, to the Trustee during the bankruptcy
period. How much he is to contribute is set out in Directive 11R - “Surplus Income”. This
amount is updated annually to reflect current economic conditions.
The BIA requires the bankrupt to disclose the “family unit’s total monthly income” which
includes his earnings and the earnings of anyone else in the family unit. Family unit is defined
in Directive 11R as including any persons who reside in the same household and who benefit
from either the expenses incurred or income earned by the bankrupt, or who contribute to
such expenses or earnings. The bankrupt is also required to disclose the family unit’s total
monthly non-discretionary expenses (i.e., child/spousal support, medical expenses, child
care). After subtracting the non-discretionary expenses from the family unit’s total income,
the Directive allows a deduction of a standard minimum monthly amount the family unit is
allowed to retain. If there are any funds remaining after the minimum standard amount is
deducted, this amount is considered surplus income. A formula as to the debtor’s portion of
total income is then used to determine the final payment amount that is to be remitted to the
Trustee.
In situations where the non-bankrupt spouse refuses to divulge their income or expenses, as
part of the family unit, the standard minimum monthly amount that is deducted from the family
unit income is reduced by 50%. Refer to Example 6 in Appendix B of Directive 11R.
Upon filing an assignment in bankruptcy the bankrupt must prepare (and the Trustee is to
review) the required financial information as set out in “Monthly Income and Expense
Statement of the Bankrupt and the Family Unit and Information (or Amended Information)
Concerning the Financial Situation of the Individual Bankrupt.” This form is then sent to the
Official Receiver and a file copy is retained.
2.5.4. Mediation
BIA s. 68
Bankrupts have a right to disagree with certain decisions made by a Trustee and they can
request that a third party review the situation. This process is called mediation. A bankrupt
can request mediation if he does not agree with the amount of the monthly surplus income
payments established by the Trustee.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 40
Usually, the mediation hearing will resolve the issue and the parties will agree on a
settlement. However, if no agreement is made, the matter is then brought before the court
and the court’s decision is final.
2.5.5. Assets
In the event of an assignment in bankruptcy the assets of the bankrupt vest with the Trustee.
Each province has its own legislation about what assets are exempt from execution or
seizure. Certain federal laws can also state that certain assets are exempt from execution or
seizure. Those legal rules also apply to the right of possession of assets by a Trustee.
Property of the bankrupt and exempt assets are discussed in more detail in Module 12.
In a proposal, the debtor may choose to retain his assets.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 41
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
 •Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
3. Bankruptcy Administration Process Overview

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 42
Table of Contents
3. BANKRUPTCY ADMINISTRATION PROCESS OVERVIEW ... 41
3.1. Introduction ...44
3.2. The bankruptcy administration process ...44
3.2.1. Assessment ...48
3.2.2. Prepare documentation ...48
3.2.3. Submit to OSB ...49
3.2.4. Secure Trustee’s interest in assets ...49
3.2.5. Issue notice to creditors ...50
3.2.6. When a meeting of creditors is required...50
3.2.7. Creditors submit proof of claim ...51
3.2.8. Validate proofs of claim ...51
3.2.9. Value assets ...52
3.2.10. Research methods of sale ...52
3.2.11. Draft Trustee’s preliminary report...53
3.2.12. Chair conducts 1st meeting ...53
3.2.13. Instructions from creditors on administration issues/ Trustee obtains
inspectors’ approval / instructions ...53
3.2.14. Follow through on action items ...53
3.2.15. Realize assets ...53
3.2.16. Monitor file ...54
3.2.17. Submit Section 170 report ...55
3.2.18. Discharge – first time or second time, not opposed ...55
3.2.19. Discharge where court hearing is required ...56
3.2.20. Book court hearing ...56

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 43
3.2.21. Court hearing ...56
3.2.22. Review file to ensure completeness ...57
3.2.23. Prepare Final Statement of Receipts & Disbursements ...57
3.2.24. Ordinary administration bankruptcy – book court date for taxation ...58
3.2.25. Issue dividends ...58
3.2.26. Apply for Trustee’s discharge ...58
3.2.27. Summary bankruptcy – advise creditors and OSB of pending Trustee
discharge ...59
3.2.28. Organize and close file ...59

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 44
3.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to describe an overview of bankruptcy
administration.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 49(6), 67(1)(a), 68, 69, 71, 81, 81.1, 84, 102, 124, 135, 136(1), 155 and 170
 BIA Forms 21, 22, 31, 65, 67, 69, 70, 78, 79
 BIA Rule 130
 Directives 9R and 26
In Module 2, you saw that bankruptcy may be one of the debtor’s options. This module
provides an overview of the insolvency administration process for bankruptcy. The overview
is the foundation for later modules that describe the main tasks of administering a bankruptcy
engagement in greater detail. By first “seeing the forest” and previewing “the trees,” you will
be better prepared to learn the individual tasks.
3.2. The bankruptcy administration process
The next three pages illustrate the bankruptcy administration process. The key elements of
each task are described in the pages following the process charts.
Grey process boxes
Grey boxes indicate actions or events that may not be the responsibility of the insolvency
administrator. Examples: Creditors submit proof of claim; Automatic discharge granted. They
are included to complete the picture and enable you to see your role in the context of the
overall process and other stakeholders.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 45

BANKRUPTCY Administration process map (1)
E-file to OSB
Take possessionof the assets
Issue notice to creditors
Creditors submit proofs of claim
Validate proofs of claim
Value assets
Research methods of sale
Draft Trustee’s preliminary report
Chair conducts 1st meeting
Trustee obtains inspectors’ approval / instruct.
Follow-through on action items
Realize assets & file necessary tax returns
Prepare documentation
Realize assets
 1st meeting of creditors: Ordinary bankruptcy or at the request of Official Receiver or the request of creditors, representing at least 25% of proven claims field, in a summary bankruptcy

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 46

3rd time or more
Prepare Final Stmts of Receipts & Disbursements
Review file to ensure completeness
Automatic discharge granted
Court hearing
•First-time Bankrupt Auto discharge at 9 months if no surplus income or at 21 months if surplus income •Second-time Bankrupt Auto discharge at 24 months if no surplus income or at 36 months if surplus income
1st or 2nd time?
Opposed?
Monitor file & arrange 1st & 2nd counselling
Section 170 report (if necessary)
NO
YES
YES
 Book court date, notify creditors
DISCHARGE of bankrupt
BANKRUPTCY Administration process map (2)
NO
For personal bankruptcy
For personal bankruptcy

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 47

Organize and close file
Apply for trustee’s discharge
Issue dividends
Book court date fortaxation (review of fees)
Opposed within 30 days?
DISCHARGE of Trustee
For Summarybankruptcy
Advise creditors, OSB of pending auto. discharge
 For Ordinarybankruptcy
Taxation by the Court
BANKRUPTCY Administration process map (3)
YES
NO

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 48
3.2.1. Assessment
Pursuant to the OSB Directive 6R, the Trustee is required to assess the debtor. A full
discussion of how this is done was covered in Module 2.

3.2.2. Prepare documentation
BIA Forms 21, 65, 78 and 79
Directives 9R and 26
Preparing documentation is covered in more detail in Module 6.
In a literal reading of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, it would appear that the Trustee is
not involved in the bankruptcy process until his/her appointment. This is only true in situations
where a creditor (or creditors) petitions a debtor into bankruptcy. It is far more common for
insolvent persons to determine they need to file an assignment in bankruptcy during or
following the initial assessment meetings held at the Trustee’s office. Based on the
information provided in these meetings, the Trustee compiles the documentation necessary
for the filing of the assignment in bankruptcy and for the upcoming administration. While it is
true that the Official Receiver is the person who appoints the Trustee, the Official Receiver
will usually (almost always, save for very exceptional circumstances) appoint the Trustee who
assisted the debtor in preparing the bankruptcy documentation, because at least the Official
Receiver knows that this Trustee is willing to take on the appointment.
Each document that needs to be signed by the insolvent person is prepared for a specific
purpose, in an industry-wide format in accordance with the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.
You need to know the purpose of each document. Their accuracy and completeness are
fundamental to the administration process. The Trustee compiles the documentation on
behalf of the debtor because the Trustee is more familiar with the form and required content
of the documentation, but it is still the debtor who is responsible for the accuracy and
completeness of the information.
The documents that must be filed with the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy (OSB)
include the following:
E-file to OSB
Take possession
of the assets
Prepare
documentation

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 49
 Statement of Affairs;
 Resolution authorizing the filing of an assignment
 Assignment for the General Benefit of Creditors;
 Monthly Income and Expense Statement of the Bankrupt and the Family Unit;
 Estate Information Summary; and
 Assessment Certificate.
Of course, the documents above are only filed if applicable – for example, an assessment
certificate and a statement of monthly income and expenses would not be included for a
corporation, and a resolution authorizing the assignment would not be included for an
individual.
3.2.3. Submit to OSB
BIA s. 49
BIA Rule 130
When the documentation has been reviewed and signed by the Trustee and the insolvent
person, it is electronically filed with the Official Receiver for review and response. With the
filing of this documentation, the Trustee advises the Official Receiver whether the estate is to
be administered as a Summary or as an Ordinary Administration bankruptcy based on the
BIA.
The response of the OSB is to issue a Certificate of Appointment. The formal bankruptcy
process commences with this appointment.
3.2.4. Secure Trustee’s interest in assets
Securing the Trustee’s interest in assets will be covered in more detail in Module 11.
Immediately upon appointment, the Trustee secures his interest in the assets of the bankrupt.
This is done to ensure that the assets of the estate are not sold, transferred, damaged,
stolen, or dissipated before they can be dealt with by the Trustee.
It also ensures that the assets do not cause harm or incur a potential liability for the estate,
i.e., create environmental concerns.
Securing the assets of the bankrupt estate may take several forms, depending on the type of
asset and the interest that the Trustee has. The securing may include:
 obtaining insurance;
 seizing and storing inventory;
 registering on title; and/or

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 50
 reviewing the interests of any other party in the same asset.
In all cases, the Trustee is to comply with the Act and BIA Rules, and the Directives of the
OSB and act in a commercially reasonable manner. The Trustee must take the necessary
steps to ensure the interests of the estate and the general body of creditors are protected
until the assets are either sold or released.

3.2.5. Issue notice to creditors
Issuing notice to creditors is covered in more detail in Module 10. Notice of the bankruptcy
must be issued to creditors within five business days following the date of appointment. In
cases where legal action was commenced against the bankrupt at the time of the bankruptcy,
it may be appropriate, immediately following the bankruptcy, to notify the creditor that
commenced legal actions, and/or the court, of the stay of proceedings arising from the
bankruptcy. The stay occurs automatically, notwithstanding notification.
3.2.6. When a meeting of creditors is required
BIA s., 71, 102 and 155
BIA Forms 66, 68, 69, 70 and 71
A meeting of creditors is required for:
 Ordinary bankruptcies; and
 Summary bankruptcies, if creditors holding, in aggregate, at least 25% of claims proven
request a meeting. BIA Form 71 must be sent to creditors informing them of the meeting.
Issue notice to
creditors
Creditors submit
proofs of claim
Validate proofs
of claim

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 51
3.2.7. Creditors submit proof of claim
BIA s. 124 and 135
BIA Form 31 and Directive 22.
The onus of submitting a proof of claim is on the creditor pursuant to the BIA. The creditor
should be able to accurately demonstrate the balance owing as of the date of bankruptcy.
The estate welcomes proofs of claims because they provide supporting documentation on
security held by creditors on the property of the bankrupt and information on payments made
by the bankrupt in the three months prior to the date of bankruptcy.
The filing of a proof of claim entitles the creditor to ultimately participate in any distribution of
dividends, if the claim is found to be valid. In the event of a first meeting of creditors, the filing
of a valid proof of claim in advance or at the start of the meeting entitles the creditor to vote at
the meeting. The validity of the proofs of claim is determined by the Trustee pursuant to the
BIA.
3.2.8. Validate proofs of claim
BIA s. 67, 81, 81.1, 124, 135 and 136
Directive 22
Validating proofs of claim is covered in more detail in Module 7. Proofs of claim are essential
for the fair and equitable distribution of the estate, ensuring a creditor’s voting power and
entitlement in dividends. It is limited to the exact balance owing to the creditor at the date of
bankruptcy. The Proof of Claim must be accurate, supported and complete. It is important to
understand the requirements for a proof of claim to be valid and the procedure for disallowing
a proof of claim considered to be invalid. At the first meeting of creditors, the chairperson has
discretion to review the provable claims filed and allow them in whole or in part for the
purposes of voting. This decision could be subject to revision by the court if contested.
Various types of claims may be made by creditors. In some cases, e.g., property claims, 30
day goods claims, etc., the Trustee may be required to respond within a given time period.
The proper characterization of a claim, e.g., a preferred claim vs. an ordinary unsecured
claim vs. a deferred claim, may have a dramatic effect on the funds available for distribution
to ordinary creditors.

Value assets
Research
methods of sale

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 52
3.2.9. Value assets
To ensure that the assets of the bankrupt estate are not sold for an inordinately low price,
reasonable steps are taken to determine market value prior to the Trustee making a sale.
This typically includes commissioning professional appraisers to provide valuations.
Early valuation of the assets of the bankrupt estate provides:
 a basis for reporting to creditors on anticipated realization; and
 supporting documentation for amounts that are eventually realized.
3.2.10. Research methods of sale
Researching methods of sale is covered in more detail in Module 12. The Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act allows the Trustee to use various methods of sale; for each type of asset and
set of circumstances, there is usually one method that is most suitable. In every case, the
Trustee conducts a cost-benefit analysis to assess the risks and costs associated with the
available methods of sale. The results enable the Trustee to make recommendations and the
inspectors of the estate to make informed decisions on the methods to be used.
Depending on the extent of the Trustee’s interest in the asset relative to the claim of any third
party, additional investigation may be necessary to realize on the Trustee’s interest. For
example, the preferred method of sale changes significantly in the case of:
 real property, where the bankrupt is a joint owner versus sole owner; and
 an asset fully or partially encumbered by a creditor vs. being owned free and clear of
encumbrances.

Draft Trustee’s
preliminary report
Chair conducts
1st meeting
Trustee obtains
inspectors’
approval / instruct.
Follow-through
on action items
Realize assets &
file necessary
tax returns

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 53
3.2.11. Draft Trustee’s preliminary report
Directive 30
Drafting the Trustee’s preliminary report will be covered in more detail in Module 8. The
Trustee gathers preliminary indications of what the bankrupt estate consists of and what
future course of action is feasible to realize on the assets of the bankrupt.
The Trustee completes the preliminary report for the creditors. If, in the Trustee’s opinion,
there are few substantive issues, the report to the creditors may be delivered verbally at the
meeting of creditors.
3.2.12. Chair conducts 1st meeting
BIA s. 105
The Official Receiver, or his designate, will chair the first meeting of creditors. The typical
agenda of a first meeting of creditors includes:
 consideration of the affairs of the bankrupt;
 the affirmation or substitution of the Trustee; and
 the appointment of inspectors.
3.2.13. Instructions from creditors on administration issues/ Trustee obtains
inspectors’ approval / instructions
As the method of selling or an offer to purchase may not have been available at the first
meeting of creditors, there may be a need to receive further authorization or instructions from
inspectors at a later date. The BIA requires that all sales or disbursements from the estate be
authorized first by the inspectors. Inspectors meetings are conducted throughout the
bankruptcy administration as necessary. In a summary administration, if there are no
inspectors appointed, the Trustee is able to realize on assets without prior approval.
3.2.14. Follow through on action items
As instructions may have been provided to the Trustee during the first meeting of creditors,
the estate needs to follow through on them. Instructions typically include realizing specified
assets of the estate by agreed methods or continuing to research the value of assets or
method of sale.
3.2.15. Realize assets
With approval from creditors or from inspectors, a sale may be effected in accordance with
instructions provided. When it comes to the sale of an asset to a related party, court approval
is required if there are no inspectors, or if requested by creditors.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 54
Before an asset can be sold, you must ensure there are no encumbrances. This is usually
done by requesting a search through the Personal Property Security Act (PPSA), or a title
search when dealing with real estate. Sale documents must be reviewed to make sure that
the terms of the transaction, as previously discussed with the purchaser, are clear and
accurate and that the estate is released from future liability.

3.2.16. Monitor file
The estate is monitored to ensure that progress is being made:
 by the bankrupt in fulfilling his obligations;
 by the Trustee in carrying out his duties, i.e., pre- and post-bankruptcy tax returns,
reconciliation of trust accounts, etc.;
 by the Trustee’s office in providing required services, i.e., two counselling sessions for the
bankrupt (that is, an individual); and
 by service providers, i.e., realtors, auctioneers, etc. for services commissioned by the
estate.
3rd time or more
Automatic discharge
 granted Court hearing
•First-time Bankrupt

Auto discharge at 9 months if no
surplus income or at 21 months if
surplus income

•Second-time Bankrupt

Auto discharge at 24 months if no
surplus income or at 36 months if
surplus income
1st or 2nd
time?
Opposed?
NO
YES
YES
Book court date,
notify creditors NO
For personal bankruptcy

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 55
3.2.17. Submit Section 170 report
Submitting a Section 170 report (Form 82) will be covered in more detail in Module 14. Prior
to the discharge of a bankrupt individual, pursuant to Section 170 of the BIA, the Trustee may
be required to complete a report. Commonly referred to as the “Section 170 report”, this
standardized report serves:
 as a report card on the bankrupt regarding compliance with required duties;
 as a status report on the asset realization made to date by the Trustee and the
anticipated realization expected in the future; and
 on any matter considered by the Trustee to be relevant for the court to make a decision
regarding the bankrupt’s discharge. For example, while it is not a requirement, the
Trustee often offers a recommendation regarding the terms of the discharge, taking into
consideration the bankrupt’s conduct, financial circumstances and ability to pay.
3.2.18. Discharge – first time or second time, not opposed
BIA s. 168 – 178
 Summary administration – Notice of Bankruptcy and of Impending Automatic Discharge
of the Bankrupt and Request of a First Meeting of Creditors is sent within 5 business days
of the filing of the assignment, so no further notice is required.
 Ordinary administration – Notice of Bankruptcy, First Meeting of Creditors and Impending
Automatic Discharge of the Bankrupt is sent within 5 days of the filing of the assignment,
so no further notice is required.
In summary administrations, creditors are advised with the initial notice that the bankrupt is a
first or second time bankrupt and that an automatic discharge is pending. If the Trustee
and/or creditors wish to oppose the discharge, they must do so prior to the expiration of the
nine month4 or twenty-one month5 period in the case of a first time bankrupt, or within a
twenty-four4 or thirty-six month5 period for a second time bankrupt.
If, upon the expiry of nine months, twenty-one months, twenty-four months, or thirty-six
months following the date of bankruptcy, neither the Trustee nor creditors have opposed the
discharge, the bankrupt is granted an automatic discharge.
In ordinary administrations, standard practice is that the creditors receive the notice of
automatic discharge of a first or second time bankrupt together with the notice of the first
meeting of creditors.

4 if there is no surplus income payment requirement
5 if there is a requirement to pay from surplus income

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 56
The Trustee, as opposed to the court, issues the Certificate of Discharge in the two scenarios
noted above since all parties who would have an interest in the bankrupt’s estate have been
given an opportunity to oppose the discharge.
3.2.19. Discharge where court hearing is required
Only the court may issue a discharge from bankruptcy if a discharge has been opposed by
the Trustee or a creditor, if the bankrupt has filed an assignment in bankruptcy three times or
more, or if the bankrupt has a high level of income tax debts.
3.2.20. Book court hearing
The outcome of the bankruptcy will be decided by a sitting official of the Bankruptcy court.
The Trustee schedules a hearing date. The booking procedure may vary among bankruptcy
districts. Should there be a delay between the filing of the section 170 report and the date of
the hearing, the Trustee may be required to prepare and forward a supplementary report to
the court.
3.2.21. Court hearing
The court may require that the bankrupt attend the hearing in order that the court official
and/or the Trustee and/or an opposing creditor may question him.
Having considered the recommendation of the Trustee, the concerns of opposing creditors,
and the statements of the bankrupt, the court official will issue one of the following:
 Suspended Order;
 Conditional Order;
 Refused Order;
 Absolute Order (Discharge);
 Adjournment of the proceedings (Sine Die or Adjourned Generally); or
 No order

Prepare Final Stmts
of Receipts &
Disbursements
Review file to ensure
completeness
Automatic discharge
 granted
Automatic discharge granted

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 57
3.2.22. Review file to ensure completeness
Before closing the estate, the Trustee:
 ensures that the realization of all assets is complete unless certain assets cannot be
realized upon in which case the file should be properly documented;
 verifies that all sale proceeds are properly accounted for; and
 verifies that all costs of realization have been paid.
3.2.23. Prepare Final Statement of Receipts & Disbursements
Preparing Final Statements of Receipts and Disbursements will be covered in more detail in
Module 18. A dividend sheet is prepared showing the allocation of the funds available to
creditors. Proofs of claim by ordinary unsecured creditors are not typically reviewed or
admitted by the Trustee until the dividend sheet is prepared, unless there is some reason for
doing so at an earlier stage. The final statement outlines the funds realized and disbursed by
the estate.
This statement must be approved by the inspectors at a meeting of inspectors if any, and
then provided to the Office of the Superintendent for comment. Once a positive letter of
comment (indicating that there is no need to go to taxation) is issued by the Office of the
Superintendent, the Trustee may disburse the funds in accordance with the statement if the
file is a summary administration or apply to court for taxation of his account if it is an ordinary
administration.

Organize
and close file
Apply for
trustee’s discharge
Issue dividends
Book court date for
taxation (review
of fees)
Opposed within
30 days?
For Summary
bankruptcy
Advise creditors,
OSB of pending auto.
discharge
For Ordinary
bankruptcy
Taxation by the
Court
YES
NO

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 58

3.2.24. Ordinary administration bankruptcy – book court date for taxation
The fees of the Trustee for an ordinary administration bankruptcy are subject to taxation
(review) by the court.
The Trustee prepares an application to court which includes all of the information requested
in the ordinary court procedures to approve the accounts and the fees. This will typically
include a copy of the Statement of Receipts and Disbursements, an analysis of the billable
time spent on the bankruptcy estate and an explanation of the tasks accomplished and
complexities encountered. This information is often provided by way of an affidavit from the
Trustee. Depending on the court, the contents of the letter of comment from the OSB and the
requests expressed by inspectors or creditors during the administration, the creditors and/or
the OSB may be notified of the upcoming taxation so they may attend to state any concerns
regarding the amount of fees and disbursements incurred by the Trustee.
After taxation of the Trustee’s account, the Trustee will send the creditors a notice advising
them of the results (by providing the taxed final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements)
and of the intention to distribute the final dividend and proceed to the Trustee’s discharge.
This notice provides the creditors with an opportunity to contest the contents of the Final
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements within a specified delay. After the delay has
expired, assuming no creditor contested, the Trustee can then issue dividends and pay other
outstanding matters, e.g., legal fees etc. Once all funds have been distributed and the
required delays have expired, the Trustee can apply to court for his discharge.
Summary administration bankruptcies are intended to have simplified procedures. In keeping
with this intent, no taxation of the Trustee’s Statement of Receipts and Disbursements is
generally required by the Superintendent. A taxation process is possible, but this is the
exception rather than the rule.
3.2.25. Issue dividends
Dividends may be issued, in accordance with the prepared Statement of Receipts and
Disbursements, either upon inspector approval (interim dividends) or following the taxation of
the Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements.
A copy of the Trustee’s Statement of Receipts and Disbursements and the dividend sheet
accompany all dividend cheques issued to creditors who have proven claims in the estate.
3.2.26. Apply for Trustee’s discharge
Upon payment of dividends, the clearing of cheques and the bank account being closed, etc.,
the Trustee must make application to the court for its discharge.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 59
3.2.27. Summary bankruptcy – advise creditors and OSB of pending Trustee
discharge
Upon proper notification to creditors and the OSB, the Trustee is able to obtain a deemed
discharge.
The effect of the Trustee’s discharge is that:
 The Trustee is now discharged and can close his files.
 All unrealizable assets are returned to the bankrupt upon the Trustee’s discharge. The
Trustee retains an interest in any assets which may be realizable in the future.
 The Trustee is able to destroy the administration file in four years following his discharge.
3.2.28. Organize and close file
With all money paid out of the estate and the Trustee discharged, the Trustee organizes and
closes the file. The estate trust account is closed and the file is stored for the statutory period,
after which it may be destroyed.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 60
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
4. Division I Proposal Administration Process
Overview

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 61
Table of Contents
4. DIVISION I PROPOSAL ADMINISTRATION PROCESS OVERVIEW ... 60
4.1. Introduction ...64
4.2. The Division I Proposal administration process ...64
4.3. Division I proposals ...67
4.3.1. Definition ...67
4.3.2. Who can file a proposal? ...67
4.3.3. Who can a proposal be made to? ...67
4.3.4. Assessment ...67
4.3.5. Filing ...68
4.3.6. Purpose of filing the Notice of Intention ...69
4.3.7. Filing the Notice of Intention ...69
4.3.8. Other documents to be filed ...70
4.3.9. Notification to Creditors ...70
4.3.10. Extension of delay to file a proposal ...70
4.3.11. Failure to file the Cash Flow or Proposal ...71
4.3.12. Statutory terms which must be included in a proposal ...71
4.3.13. Statutory terms which may be included in a proposal ...72
4.3.14. Statutory terms which may be excluded in a proposal ...72
4.3.15. Definition of Cash Flow Statements ...72
4.3.16. Revised Cash Flow Statement ...73
4.3.17. Appraisal and investigation of the affairs and property of the insolvent
person…………. ...73
4.3.18. Notice to Creditors of Proposal and First Meeting of Creditors ...73
4.3.19. Effect of the Stay of Proceedings ...74

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 62
4.3.20. Officer of the court ...74
4.3.21. During the proposal ...74
4.3.22. Monitoring ...75
4.3.23. Interim receivership ...75
4.3.24. Trustee’s responsibility to report ...75
4.3.25. Proposal to secured creditors ...76
4.3.26. Classes of secured claims ...76
4.3.27. Stay of Proceedings...76
4.3.28. Debtor carrying on business ...77
4.3.29. Disclaimer of leases...77
4.3.30. Rights of the landlord ...77
4.3.31. Proofs of claim ...78
4.3.32. Voting ...78
4.3.33. Voting letters ...79
4.3.34. Voting by secured creditors ...79
4.3.35. Voting restrictions ...79
4.3.36. Purpose of the meeting of creditors ...79
4.3.37. Procedure for court approval ...80
4.3.38. Operations during the proposal ...80
4.3.39. Businesses ...80
4.3.40. Interim dividends ...81
4.3.41. Preferred creditors ...81
4.3.42. Payment ...81
4.3.43. Payment and distribution of funds ...81
4.3.44. Completion of proposal ...81

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 63
4.3.45. Final Statement of Receipts & Disbursements ...82
4.3.46. Taxation and final dividend ...82
4.3.47. Trustee discharge ...82
4.3.48. Discharge of debts ...82
4.3.49. Credit bureau ...82
4.3.50. Assignment in bankruptcy ...83

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 64
4.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of Module 4 and Module 5, you will be able to describe an overview of proposal
administration.
Certain processes and procedures will be identical for both Division I and consumer
proposals. Similarities in consumer proposal administrations will refer back to this module.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 2(1), 4(2), 50 – 66, 50.4, 50(10), 69(1), 69.1(1-6), 91 – 101, 243(2) and 244 (1)–(2)
 BIA Rules 89 - 95
 BIA Forms 29 - 31, 33 - 34, 36 - 38, 40, 40.1, 41, 43, 45 - 46, 78 – 79 and 92
 Directives 6R, 22R and 24
 CAIRP - Standards of Professional Practice No. 9 and 10
4.2. The Division I Proposal administration process
The next two pages illustrate the Division I proposal administration process. The key
elements of each task are described in the pages following the process charts.
Grey process boxes
As seen in Module 3, grey boxes indicate actions or events that may not be the responsibility
of the insolvency administrator. Example: Interim receiver appointed (optional). They are
included to complete the picture and enable you to see your role in the context of the overall
process and other stakeholders’ responsibilities.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 65

For both
NO

Send notice to creditors
Proposal
YES
DIVISION I PROPOSAL Administration map (1)

Proposal
File cash flow statement
Send notice of proposal and meeting of creditors
Hold meeting of creditors
Proposal accepted?
NO
Apply for courtapproval
Proposal approved?

The date of initial bankruptcy event is as of the date of the filing of the proposal, but the date of bankruptcy is the date of the refusal by creditorsor the court of the proposal
YES
Monitor performance of proposal
Assess the debtor
Apply for extension of up to 45 days each, maximum 6 months
Notice of Intention
Extension not granted or cash flow not filed, etc.
Prepare documentation
Interim receiver appointed (optional)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 66

Send notice to debtor to remedy default
YES
Issue certificate of compliance
Obtain discharge of Trustee
If not remedied, send notice to creditors & file report with O.R.
Proposal default?
Consider application to court to have proposal annulled
DIVISION I PROPOSAL Administration process map (2)
Monitor performance of proposal
NO

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 67
4.3. Division I proposals
4.3.1. Definition
A Division I proposal is an agreement between a debtor and his creditors reached pursuant
to the provisions set out in the BIA. Such an agreement usually involves unsecured creditors
agreeing to accept an amount less than 100% of their outstanding debt, but a proposal could
also include other characteristics, such as an exchange of property, an extension of time to
make the payment, etc. A proposal could include one or more or all of these characteristics,
but most often it involves primarily a payment of a lesser amount than what is otherwise due.
This repayment can either be a lump sum payment or a percentage of each of the creditors’
claims, may be paid in one instalment or over a period of time, and may or may not include
some liquidation of assets. Proposals are generally used when a debtor recognizes that he
can afford to pay a portion of his debt but not all.
4.3.2. Who can file a proposal?
BIA s. 50(1)
A Division I proposal can be made by:
 an insolvent person;
 a receiver, within the meaning of, but only in relation to, an insolvent person;
 a liquidator of an insolvent person’s property;
 a bankrupt; or
 the Trustee of the estate of a bankrupt.
An insolvent person or bankrupt, as defined in the BIA, would include a corporation, an
individual, a partnership or an income trust.
4.3.3. Who can a proposal be made to?
BIA s. 50(1.2)
A proposal must be made to all creditors generally, either en masse or separated into
classes, as provided in the proposal. A proposal may also be made to secured creditors in
respect of any class or classes of secured claims.
4.3.4. Assessment
BIA s. 50(1) and 243(2), Directive 6R
Before filing a proposal, the Trustee must make an assessment of the debtor. The
assessment process is discussed in detail in Module 2.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 68
For a debtor to file a proposal, the proposal must be more beneficial than bankruptcy. The
Trustee will review the options available with the debtor during the assessment and the
debtor will choose his best option. It is important to note that the final decision has to be the
debtor’s, as he is the party affected by this decision. The Trustee’s role is to provide
information on the various options and their possible consequences, to make sure the debtor
makes an informed decision.
A debtor will assess his ability to make monthly payments for a period of time under the
proposal or, if possible, make a lump sum payment by obtaining the funds through a bank
loan, sale or mortgage of assets, or monies from a third party.
A corporation would only file a proposal if it was thought the business operation was viable
and that the business would continue operations, or if there is a compelling reason to carry
out the liquidation in a context of a proposal as opposed to a bankruptcy.
There is no provision in the BIA for filing of a joint Division I proposal, although the court in
the past has allowed the administration of estates on a joint basis or the filing of a joint
proposal. This has happened where it is commercially more efficient to do so, for example,
where there is a group of related entities that are inextricably integrated to a point where it is
impossible or impractical to differentiate between the activities and the debts of one entity
versus the other.
Leave can be given for the estate of a deceased debtor to file a proposal.
4.3.5. Filing
BIA s. 50(6) and 62.1
BIA Forms 29, 30, 78 and 79
Once the debtor has made the decision to file a proposal, the Trustee will prepare the
following documents for the debtor’s signature:
 Assessment of an Individual Debtor;
 Statement of Affairs, Statement of Affairs (Business Proposal) or Statement of Affairs
(Non-Business Proposal);
 Cash Flow Statement;
 Proposal; and
 A report regarding the preparation of the cash flow.
It is important to note that these documents are most often compiled by the Trustee because
of the Trustee’s familiarity with the specific format and content requirements of these
documents. The debtor is, in fact, the person who is responsible for the contents of these
documents. For example, the cash flow statement may be compiled by the Trustee, but it is
compiled from information provided and assumptions made by the debtor, and the debtor is
fully responsible for such information and assumptions.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 69
The Trustee would then prepare and sign:
 A report on the reasonableness of the cash flow prepared and signed by the Trustee; and
 Estate Summary Information.
If the debtor is a corporation, a certified copy of a resolution of the Board of Directors
authorizing the making of the proposal must be filed with the Official Receiver.
The proposal is effective only when filed with the Official Receiver and not simply when
lodged with the Trustee. An Official Receiver has no discretion to refuse to accept a proposal.
4.3.6. Purpose of filing the Notice of Intention
Occasionally, an insolvent person who wishes to file a proposal will not have all of the
information needed in order to proceed with the proposal and will require the Stay of
Proceedings provision of the BIA. Examples of this situation would be:
 where a judgement has been granted against the insolvent person and the judgement
creditor is about to garnish the bank account or wages;
 when a judgement creditor is about to seize the property of the insolvent person; or
 Canada Revenue Agency (CRA or other taxing authority) has issued a Requirement to
Pay against the insolvent person’s bank account or wages, or is about to place a lien on
the insolvent person’s real property.
4.3.7. Filing the Notice of Intention
BIA s. 50.4(1)
BIA Form 33
The insolvent person would file the Notice of Intention with the Official Receiver in his locale.
The Notice of Intention states the following:
 the insolvent person’s intention to make a proposal;
 the name and address of the Licensed Insolvency Trustee who has consented, in writing,
to act as the Trustee in the proposal; and
 the names of creditors with claims amounting to $250 or more and the amounts of the
claims, as known.
Normally, the list of creditors is attached to the Notice of Intention as a separate list, as is the
Trustee’s consent.
The Trustee would sign both an Assessment Certificate, in the case of an individual debtor,
and the Estate Information Summary to accompany the Notice of Intention.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 70
An insolvent person could file a Notice of Intention with the Official Receiver during, or just
after, the preliminary consultation with a Trustee. The Notice of Intention is filed by the
Trustee with the Official Receiver through e-filing (or, if circumstances warrant, by telecopier)
and, once received in his office, at any time of day, the Stay of Proceedings takes effect.
4.3.8. Other documents to be filed
BIA s. 50.4
BIA Forms 29 and 30
Within ten days of filing the Notice of Intention the insolvent person must file the following
with the Official Receiver:
 the Cash Flow Statement (containing a list of the significant assumptions on which it is
premised), signed by the Trustee and the insolvent person;
 a report by the insolvent person regarding the preparation of the cash flow, prepared and
signed by the insolvent person; and
 a report on the reasonableness of the Cash Flow, signed by the Trustee.
Within 30 days of filing the Notice of Intention the insolvent person must either file the
proposal, or ask for an extension of the delay to file a proposal. In both cases, it will be
necessary to file a revised Cash Flow Statement with the Official Receiver and, in the case of
an extension of the delay, with the court.
4.3.9. Notification to Creditors
Within five days of filing the Notice of Intention, the Trustee sends a copy of the Notice of
Intention to every known creditor.
4.3.10. Extension of delay to file a proposal
BIA s. 50.4(9)
An insolvent person may apply for an extension of the delay to file the proposal before the
expiration of the 30 days. The court may grant an extension for a period not exceeding 45
days and may grant subsequent extensions of the delay, provided that the entire period,
including the original 30 days, does not exceed 6 months. The court will consider a number of
factors when reviewing the request for the extension, for example:
 whether the insolvent person has acted in good faith and with due diligence;
 the likelihood the insolvent person will be able to file a viable proposal if the extension is
granted; and
 whether any creditor will be materially prejudiced if the extension is granted.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 71
During the extension period, if the court believes that any of the factors above are not being
met, it may terminate the delay allowed to file the proposal and the insolvent person will be
thereupon deemed to have made an assignment in bankruptcy.
4.3.11. Failure to file the Cash Flow or Proposal
BIA s. 50.4(8) and 102
BIA Form 34
If the insolvent person fails to file the Cash Flow Statement within the 10 days, or the
proposal within the 30 days (or within such extension of the delay to file a proposal as may
have been allowed by the court), he is deemed to have made an assignment in bankruptcy.
The Trustee will then forward a report in prescribed form to the Official Receiver, who will
issue a Certificate of Assignment. The Trustee must also, within five days after the issuance
of the Certificate, send notice of a meeting of creditors.
4.3.12. Statutory terms which must be included in a proposal
BIA s. 60 (1), 60 (1.1), 60 (1.3), 60(2), 136 (1)
As discussed earlier, a proposal is an agreement between an insolvent person and his
creditors. However, in order for a proposal to be approved by the court, these provisions
must be included:
 payment of preferred claims in priority to claims of ordinary creditors;
 payment of all proper fees and expenses of the Trustee;
 unless the Crown consents otherwise, payment in full to CRA, in the right of Canada or a
province, within six months after court approval of the proposal, of all amounts that were
outstanding at the time of the filing of the notice of intention or of the proposal and are of
a kind that could be subject to a demand for garnishment under section 224(1.2) of the
Income Tax Act, i.e., principally the payroll source deductions, employer’s share of CPP
contributions or employment insurance premiums, including any related interest or
penalties thereon;
 the similar amounts due to the Quebec Revenue Agency, to be paid within six months
after court approval of the proposal, unless the Crown consents to a longer delay;
 in a proposal by an employer, payment to employees, immediately after court approval, of
amounts equal to what the employees would be qualified to receive if the employer
became bankrupt, together with the payment of wages, salaries, commissions or
compensation for services rendered after the date the proposal is filed and before the
court approval;
 if the proposal is made by an employer that has a pension plan available for its
employees, payment to the plan of the amounts that would be a claim secured by the

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 72
statutory security under sections 81.5 or 81.6 of the BIA if the insolvent person became
bankrupt. The proposal could also provide for payment of less than the full amount of
these claims, if the pension plan and the relevant pension regulator agree;
 if the proposal provides for the payment of equity claims, it must provide that no such
amount will be paid unless all other claims have been paid in full;
 all payments of monies in the proposal should be paid to the Trustee; and
 if the creditors are to receive promissory notes, debentures, shares, etc., the delivery of
these should be made to the Trustee for distribution to the creditor(s).
Terms of the proposal must be clear and definite so that any interested party can determine
whether the terms of the proposal are being met.
4.3.13. Statutory terms which may be included in a proposal
BIA s. 55 and 56
These terms may be included:
 the appointment of one or more, but not exceeding five, inspectors; and
 at a meeting of creditors to consider the proposal, the creditors, with the consent of the
insolvent person, may include terms in the proposal with respect to supervision of the
affairs of the insolvent person.
4.3.14. Statutory terms which may be excluded in a proposal
BIA s. 95-101
The BIA permits a proposal to provide that the section dealing with fraudulent transfers of
property not apply in the proposal. Should the proposal be annulled by the court, sections 95
– 101 of the BIA will apply as if the debtor became bankrupt on the date of the initial
bankruptcy event.
4.3.15. Definition of Cash Flow Statements
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 9
The Cash Flow Statement is a statement prepared by the insolvent person, indicating his
projected cash flow. The statement is based on the probable and hypothetical assumptions
that reflect the insolvent person’s situation and his planned course of action for the period
covered in the proposal.
The Trustee will often assist the insolvent person in preparing the Cash Flow Statement. In
the case of an individual debtor, it is often a statement of current income and expenses. If the
proposal is for a lengthy period of time, the expenses will need to cover annual or even biannual expenses that an individual may have.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 73
In the case of a corporation or business, the Cash Flow Statement may be prepared by the
company’s staff or accountant but again, often the Trustee will assist in the preparation of this
Cash Flow Statement.
The Canadian Association of Insolvency and Restructuring Professionals (CAIRP) has
prepared a Standard of Professional Practice, No. 9, entitled Cash Flow Statement. The
Standard of Professional Practice was developed to provide guidance to the Trustee as to his
statutory responsibilities under the BIA.
4.3.16. Revised Cash Flow Statement
If an insolvent person has previously filed a Cash Flow Statement with the Notice of Intention
to File a Proposal, a revised Cash Flow Statement must be filed at the time of the filing of the
proposal with the Official Receiver.
4.3.17. Appraisal and investigation of the affairs and property of the insolvent
person
BIA s. 50(5) and 50(10)
BIA Rule 90, Directive 24
The Trustee is required to make an appraisal and investigation of the affairs and property of
the insolvent person so the Trustee can estimate with reasonable accuracy the financial
situation of the insolvent person and the causes of the insolvency. The Trustee must report
his findings to the meeting of creditors held to discuss the proposal. The report should be
filed with Official Receiver and provided to the creditors as early as possible in the process so
that they may make an informed decision on the proposal. Sometimes, a preliminary report is
sent with the notice of the meeting and an update (with a recommendation) is provided
before or at the meeting of creditors. Directive 24 discusses the information to be provided to
creditors in commercial proposals.
This report gives the creditors the information they need to make a decision regarding their
acceptance or rejection of the proposal. One key element of the report is the Statement of
Estimated Realization, which gives a summary of both a bankruptcy and proposal scenario
and the resulting funds available for distribution for unsecured creditors in each scenario.
4.3.18. Notice to Creditors of Proposal and First Meeting of Creditors
BIA s. 51 (1)
BIA Forms 31, 36, 78 and 92
At least 10 calendar days before the meeting of creditors, the Trustee must mail the following
to every known creditor and to the Official Receiver:
 notice of the day, time and place of the meeting;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 74
 a condensed Statement of Assets and Liabilities (this is usually the Statement of Affairs);
 a report on the insolvent person’s business and financial affairs;
 a list of creditors with claims amounting to $250.00 or more;
 a copy of the Proposal;
 a Proof of Claim form;
 a proxy; and
 a voting letter.
If the proposal provides for a waiver of the recourses for preferential payments, transfers at
undervalue, dividends, share redemptions, or other such void or voidable transactions, the
Trustee needs to file a report (which could be incorporated in the report on the financial
affairs) providing the Trustee’s opinion on the reasonableness of the decision to exclude
these recourses in the circumstances.
4.3.19. Effect of the Stay of Proceedings
BIA s. 69(1) and 69.1(1)
Upon the filing of a Notice of Intention to File a Proposal or the filing of a proposal, a creditor
is prohibited from instituting or continuing any proceedings against the insolvent person or his
assets with a view to recover a claim provable in bankruptcy without leave of the Bankruptcy
Court.
4.3.20. Officer of the court
Although in a proposal the Trustee is often looked upon as working for the debtor, this is not
a correct characterization. The Trustee is an officer of the court and does not represent the
debtor or the creditors.
A Licensed Insolvency Trustee is an impartial party who must aim to properly carry out the
objectives of the bankruptcy legislation and, as such, has an obligation to the debtor, the
creditors, the court and other interested parties. The Trustee ensures the insolvent person
gets the protection of the BIA and also that the creditors get the proper distribution they are
entitled to.
4.3.21. During the proposal
The role of the Trustee during the administration of the proposal is to ensure that the debtor
and creditors comply with the terms of the proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 75
4.3.22. Monitoring
BIA s. 50(10) and 50.4(7)
As there could be almost seven months between the time of the filing of the Notice of
Intention and the first meeting of creditors, the financial position of the debtor could change
substantially between the time the proceedings are commenced and the time creditors look
at a proposal. For this reason, the BIA attributes a responsibility for the Trustee to monitor the
operations of the insolvent person. To monitor does not mean to take over operations or
control them, but rather to supervise without interfering, to enquire into changes in the
circumstances, compare the actual and forecasted cash flow projections, remain informed
about the changes that are occurring in the debtor’s operations, discuss the structural
changes that might be desirable to return the operations to a viable level, and assess the
impact of current events, changes in circumstances, in the cash flow or in assumptions on
the ability of the debtor to present a viable proposal.
For the purpose of monitoring, the debtor must allow access to the Trustee to the insolvent
person’s property, including premises, books, records and other financial documents to the
extent necessary to adequately assess the insolvent person’s business and financial affairs.
4.3.23. Interim receivership
BIA s. 47 (1)
It is sometimes appropriate to appoint an interim receiver during the pendency of the
proposal process. The interim receiver can be appointed to give creditors comfort, or if it is
necessary to protect the assets of the insolvent person. The interim receiver could be
appointed at the request of the creditors, an interested party or the insolvent person himself.
The interim receiver could be the Trustee named in the Notice of Intention or the proposal,
another Trustee, or both of them jointly. The interim receiver would have the powers that the
court allows, between taking possession of the assets, taking conservative measures,
disposing of property that is perishable or likely to rapidly depreciate in value, or monitor the
affairs of the insolvent person instead of the Trustee appointed in the Notice of Intention or
proposal.
This is very rarely, if ever, used for an individual debtor. It is usually used for a business
which continues to operate during the period after the Notice of Intention is filed but before
filing the proposal and holding the first meeting of creditors.
4.3.24. Trustee’s responsibility to report
If there is any material adverse change to the debtor’s cash flow or financial circumstances,
the Trustee must file a report with the Official Receiver and the court, as required.
In the case of a Notice of Intention to File a Proposal, a report must also be filed with the
court if the insolvent person applies for an extension for filing the proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 76
4.3.25. Proposal to secured creditors
BIA s. 50(1.2-1.3)
A proposal can be made to secured creditors. The proposal does not have to be made to all
secured creditors but must be made to each creditor within a specific class.
If a proposal is made to secured creditors, it must also be made to all unsecured creditors.
4.3.26. Classes of secured claims
BIA s. 50(1.3-1.4)
Secured claims may be included in the same class if the interests of the creditors holding
these claims are sufficiently similar to give them a commonality of interest. Points which must
be taken into consideration when setting the classes are:
 the nature of the debts giving rise to the claims;
 the nature and priority of the security with respect to the claims;
 the remedies available to the creditors in the absence of the proposal and the extent to
which creditors would recover their claims by exercising those remedies; and
 the treatment of the claims under the proposal and the extent to which the claims would
be paid under the proposal and any further criteria consistent with the above.
If there is any difficulty in setting the classes of secured claims, an application may be made
to court for a determination of the proper classes.
4.3.27. Stay of Proceedings
BIA s. 69(1-3), 69.1(1-6), 69.4 and 244(1-2)
A secured creditor cannot enforce its security if a Notice of Intention to File a Proposal or a
proposal has been filed, because of the stay of proceedings that prevents all creditors,
secured and unsecured, from taking proceedings against the debtor or the debtor’s assets to
recover a claim provable in bankruptcy. The stay is in effect until the Trustee has been
discharged or the insolvent person has become bankrupt.
However, as regards the secured creditor, the stay does not apply or is terminated if the
following has occurred:
 the secured creditor took possession of the assets prior to the filing of the Notice of
Intention to File a Proposal or the proposal;
 the secured creditor gave notice of its intention under the BIA to enforce its security more
than 10 days prior to the filing, or the secured creditor gave notice of its intention to
enforce its security prior to the filing and the insolvent person has waived the notice and
consented to the earlier enforcement;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 77
 the proposal does not deal with the claims of the secured creditors; or
 a particular class of secured creditor has rejected the proposal.
In addition, a secured creditor or an unsecured creditor can ask the court to declare that the
stay does not apply or ceases to apply, if the secured or unsecured creditor can demonstrate
that it suffers a material prejudice from the application of the stay, or that it is equitable on
other grounds to terminate the stay.
4.3.28. Debtor carrying on business
Where an insolvent person intends to carry on business after the filing of a proposal, it is
usual for the proposal to contain a clause which states that any creditors’ claims arising after
the date of filing the proposal will be paid in full in the ordinary course of business. This
clause is not essential as the BIA specifies which claims can be compromised in the context
of a proposal. It does however serve to reaffirm the debtor’s intentions regarding the on-going
relationship with the creditors. The creditors have a right to request, and may very well have
requested, that all transactions after the date of the Notice of Intention or proposal be on a
“cash on delivery” basis. The debtor wants to set the stage in the proposal for a return to a
more convenient and usual business relationship based on some reasonable trade terms.
4.3.29. Disclaimer of leases
BIA Form 45
BIA Rule 95
The BIA gives an insolvent person who is a commercial tenant of real property the right to
disclaim a lease. Notice of 30 days must be given to the landlord and the notice must be
given by:
 registered mail;
 personal service; or
 a manner described in the lease.
The notice may be given at any time between filing of the Notice of Intention and filing a
proposal or at the time of filing the proposal. The BIA does not require the debtor to
undertake any sort of negotiations with the landlord prior to disclaiming the lease.
4.3.30. Rights of the landlord
BIA s. 65.2
Directive 22R (Appendix B in particular)
The landlord may apply to court within 15 days after receiving notice of the disclaimer, for a
declaration that this section does not apply with respect to his lease. The court is required to

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 78
make such a declaration unless the insolvent person can satisfy the court that he will not be
able to make a viable proposal without the disclaimer of the lease and all other leases
disclaimed by the debtor. The burden of satisfying the court that the insolvent person would
not make a viable proposal is on the debtor.
The landlord has no claim for accelerated rent and the proposal must indicate whether the
landlord may file a proof of claim for actual losses resulting from the disclaimer or for an
amount equal to the lesser of the aggregate of:
 the rent provided for in the lease for the first year of the lease following the date on which
the disclaimer becomes effective;
 15% of the rent for the remainder of the term of the lease after that year; or
 3 years’ rent.
The landlord’s claim would be included in the general class of unsecured claims that includes
claims of all unsecured creditors, including persons who are not landlords. The debtor’s
proposal, however, could create different classes of creditors, one of which could be a class
of landlords whose lease has been disclaimed. Note that it is not usually advisable to create
several classes of unsecured creditors.
4.3.31. Proofs of claim
Form 31, Directive 22
Only creditors who have filed a proof of claim are entitled to vote. The proof of claim must be
properly completed and filed prior to the commencement of the meeting. Proofs of claim are
more fully discussed in Module 7.
4.3.32. Voting
BIA s. 54 , Directive 22 (Appendix B)
In order for the proposal to be binding on a class of creditors, that class of creditors must vote
to approve the proposal. A resolution accepting the proposal must be carried by a majority in
number (i.e., counting heads) and 2/3’s in value of the creditors who are present and voting
on the resolution, or those who have sent voting letters. If one class of secured creditors
votes against the proposal (or if none of the secured creditors in that class votes), the
proposal does not apply to that class of secured creditors, and the secured creditors in that
class are no longer subject to the stay of proceedings. If one class of unsecured creditors
votes against the proposal, the insolvent person is deemed to have made an assignment in
bankruptcy right then and there.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 79
4.3.33. Voting letters
BIA s. 53, BIA Rule 91
A creditor does not have to be present (in person or by proxy) in order to vote on the
proposal. The BIA permits a creditor who has proven a claim to accept or reject the proposal
by way of voting letter.
4.3.34. Voting by secured creditors
A secured creditor must file a proof of security in order to vote on the proposal. Unless the
proposal has set an assessed value to the secured creditor’s claim, the secured creditor can
vote the entire amount of the claim. If an assessed value has been set, the creditor can vote
the lesser of the amount of the claim or the assessed value. If the secured creditor is
dissatisfied with the assessed value, it can apply to court to revise the assessment.
A secured creditor is not required to file a proof of security and, if no secured creditors of a
particular class file a claim, the secured creditors of that class are deemed to have rejected
the proposal.
4.3.35. Voting restrictions
BIA s. 4(2) and 54
These voting restrictions apply:
 a related person may vote against, but not for, acceptance of the proposal;
 in a proposal by an employer, an employee cannot vote in respect of the claim for wages
that must be paid in priority;
 a person with an “equity claim” (i.e., a claim that relates to ownership interest, such as a
claim for an unpaid dividend, or the price for a share redemption, or a claim in damages
for a lost investment by a shareholder due to misrepresented information or a similar
claim) cannot vote unless the court decides otherwise; and
 the Trustee, as a creditor, may not vote on the proposal.
4.3.36. Purpose of the meeting of creditors
The purpose of the meeting is for the creditors to either accept or reject the proposal. The
Trustee must attend the meeting of creditors and this duty cannot be delegated. The
insolvent person is also required to be at the meeting and both the Trustee and the insolvent
person should answer any proper question of the creditors at this meeting.
If the creditors are not completely satisfied with the proposal, or with the explanations given
by the Trustee or the debtor, they can adjourn the meeting to allow the Trustee to carry out a
further review and investigation in the debtor’s financial affairs. If they believe they have
sufficient information to make a decision but they are not satisfied with the compromise, they

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 80
can negotiate with the debtor. As a result of these negotiations, amendments can be
proposed and approved at the meeting of creditors. This is more fully discussed in Module 15
and Module 16.
Also at the meeting the creditors may appoint one or more, but not exceeding, 5 inspectors.
The procedures involving the acceptance or rejection of a proposal are more fully covered in
Module 15 and Module 16. As well, the full procedure regarding the meeting of creditors is
discussed in Module 10.
4.3.37. Procedure for court approval
BIA s. 58, BIA Forms 40-40.1
If a proposal is accepted by creditors, the Trustee has five days to apply to court for an
appointment for a hearing of the application for the courts approval of the proposal.
Notice of the hearing must be sent at least 15 days prior to the hearing to every proven
creditor, the Official Receiver and the court.
The Trustee must file a report with the court at least two days prior to the date of the hearing
and a copy of this report must be sent to the Official Receiver at least 10 days prior to the
hearing.
The approval of the proposal by court is more fully discussed in Module 15 and Module 16.
4.3.38. Operations during the proposal
In the proposal for an individual insolvent person the Trustee has very little involvement with
the day-to-day life of the individual. It is essentially “business as usual”, although often the
proposal will lay out certain specific requirements for the insolvent person. These usually
revolve around:
 making regular payments to the Trustee for the benefit of the creditors;
 complying with certain requirements, such as filing the required income tax returns and
making the required instalments in accordance with the Income Tax Act and the Taxation
Act in Quebec; and
 filing whatever financial requirements were required in the proposal.
4.3.39. Businesses
The Trustee may have more involvement during the proposal with a business, again
depending upon the terms of the proposal. Usually a proposal is filed if a business is viable
and the operations are to continue. However, there may be provisions to:
 sell a division of the business;
 sell certain equipment;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 81
 obtain further financing; and/or
 begin a new area of operations.
The Trustee may or may not be involved in any of the above and again, this would depend on
how the proposal was structured.
4.3.40. Interim dividends
During the term of the proposal the Trustee will pay dividends to creditors based on the terms
set out in the proposal.
Normally, dividends are paid semi-annually or annually to creditors who have proven their
claims prior to the dividend being declared.
4.3.41. Preferred creditors
As the proposal must state that preferred creditors are paid in priority to other creditors, a
preferred creditor can be paid at any time the funds become available.
4.3.42. Crown Claims
BIA s. 60(1.1), ITA s. 224(1.2)
Although not classified as a dividend, any payments relating to Crown Claims in respect of
source deduction amounts owing must be paid within six months after court approval of the
proposal.
4.3.43. Payment and distribution of funds
BIA s. 60(2 -3) and 147
All monies payable under a proposal must be paid to the Trustee and must be distributed by
him to any creditor. Even if the proposal provides for distribution of promissory notes, etc.,
the distribution must be made by the Trustee. When paying a dividend to proven creditors,
the Trustee must deduct the Superintendent’s levy.
4.3.44. Completion of proposal
BIA s. 65.3, Form 46
If the proposal is fully performed by the insolvent person, the Trustee issues a Certificate of
Full Performance to the debtor and the Official Receiver. The issuance of the Certificate of
Full Performance has the same effect as a discharge from bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 82
4.3.45. Final Statement of Receipts & Disbursements
BIA s. 66 (1.2), Form 12
Once the proposal is fully performed and the Trustee has received all the funds, he will
complete the Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements. If there were inspectors
appointed at the first meeting of creditors, a meeting of inspectors must be called in order for
the inspectors to approve the Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements.
4.3.46. Taxation and final dividend
Form 17
Upon completion of the Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements and inspectors’
approval, if applicable, the Trustee will forward the Statement to the Office of the
Superintendent for comment. If the Office of the Superintendent sees no concerns or
problems with the statement, it will then forward a comment letter to the Trustee indicating
the Trustee should proceed to taxation of his account. Once the Trustee has had the
statement taxed by the court, he will send notice to all proven creditors of the Trustee’s
application for discharge and forward the final dividends to the creditors.
4.3.47. Trustee discharge
Form 10 or 11
Once all the dividend cheques have cleared the bank, the account is closed and the
prescribed time has passed, the Trustee may apply to court to obtain his discharge.
The final step in the administration of a proposal is more fully covered in Module 18.
4.3.48. Discharge of debts
BIA s.65.3 and 178
Once the insolvent person receives his Certificate of Full Performance, the balance of any
debt owing by the insolvent person is discharged, except those debts that would not be
discharged by an order of discharge in a bankruptcy (unless the creditors that have
undischargeable debts have specifically voted in favor of a proposal that clearly provides that
these debts will be discharged). The advantage of a proposal is that the insolvent person is
able to receive some relief from the burden of his debts but has avoided a bankruptcy.
4.3.49. Credit bureau
A proposal will be recorded as an 7 rather than an 9 on the credit bureau report for a period
of three years from the date of full performance. Creditors reviewing the credit bureau reports
will know that, if the insolvent person filed a proposal, the creditors received a better
distribution than in a bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 83
4.3.50. Assignment in bankruptcy
If a proposal is not approved by the creditors or the court, the debtor is deemed to have filed
an assignment in bankruptcy. The debtor then must proceed through the bankruptcy process
in order to obtain his discharge from his debt.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 84
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
5. Consumer Proposal Administration

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 85
Table of Contents
5. CONSUMER PROPOSAL ADMINISTRATION ... 84
5.1. Introduction ...87
5.2. The consumer proposal administration process ...88
5.3. Consumer proposals ...93
5.3.1. Definition ...93
5.3.2. Who can file a consumer proposal? ...93
5.3.3. Joint proposal ...93
5.3.4. Assessment ...93
5.3.5. Prepare documentation ...94
5.3.6. Statutory terms ...94
5.3.7. Report to creditors and the Official Receiver ...94
5.3.8. Notice to creditors ...95
5.3.9. Stay of proceedings and unsecured creditors ...95
5.3.10. Secured creditors ...95
5.3.11. Duties of the Administrator ...96
5.3.12. Voting ...96
5.3.13. Proofs of claim and voting letters ...96
5.3.14. Requirement for meeting of creditors ...96
5.3.15. Non-acceptance of the proposal ...97
5.3.16. Deemed approval by the court ...97
5.3.17. Procedure for application to court ...97
5.3.18. Counselling ...98
5.3.19. Interim dividends ...98
5.3.20. Certificate of Full Performance ...98

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 86
5.3.21. Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ...98
5.3.22. Trustee discharge ...99
5.3.23. Discharge of debts ...99
5.3.24. Credit bureau ...99
5.3.25. No stay of proceedings ...99

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 87
5.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to describe an overview of proposal administration.
Certain processes and procedures will be identical for both Division I and consumer
proposals and will be discussed in this module. Similarities in consumer proposal
administrations will refer back to Module 4.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 66.4 - 66.11, 106.1 and 136
 BIA Forms 31, 47 - 59, 65 and 79
 BIA Rules 96 – 103 and 129
 Directives 1R and 2R
 CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 8

Amendments of a consumer proposal
A consumer debtor may have filed a proposal a couple of years ago and his current
circumstances have changed and could prompt a modification to his consumer proposal. The
consumer debtor could have changed employment, separated, incurrent incurred new
monthly expenses in his budget and now affects his ability to continue payments on his initial
consumer proposal.
It is possible throughout the proposal process to file an amended proposal, which would
address those new changes and allow the debtor to balance out his budget and creditors to
still recover funds from a proposal and avoid a bankruptcy.
In the event that an amended proposal is filed, the Administrator is expected to send out
notices, a report, the terms of the consumer proposal, voting letter and allow the creditors a
delay of 45 days (same delay as the initial proposal) to file their voting letter. The approval
process will be the same as for the initial proposal.
Revival of a consumer proposal
BIA s. 66.31(1) (6)
A consumer proposal is deemed annulled when the payments are in default of the equivalent
of 3 months (either a monthly or less frequently than monthly payment)
Once the consumer proposal is deemed annulled the stay of proceedings is not applicable
and the rights of creditors are reinstated.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 88
If the consumer proposal is made by a bankrupt, once it is annulled, the consumer debtor is
deemed to have filed for bankruptcy. The automatic revival process is not an option for the
bankrupt.
If the consumer proposal is not made by a bankrupt, from the date of the deemed annulment,
there is a 30 day period to revive the debtor’s proposal. Based on the circumstances, the
administrator may consider that it is appropriate to send a notice in the prescribed form (Form
93) informing that the consumer proposal will be revived automatically 60 days after the
deemed annulment.
Once they receive the notice, the creditors and official receiver have the option to file an
objection to the automatic revival process. If no objection is filed, the Administrator will file in
the prescribed form (Form 96) confirmation that the proposal is duly revived. The stay of
proceedings will be reinstated.
If the administrator receives an objection to the revival process, a notice is sent out to inform
creditors and official receiver.
If a consumer debtor wants a proposal revived outside the 30 day period (automatic revival)
or if an objection is filed by a creditor, the administrator may apply to court to have the
proposal revived by the court. The court will consider the current circumstances and may
make an order reviving the proposal.

5.2. The consumer proposal administration process
The next three pages illustrate the consumer proposal administration process. The key
elements of each task are described in the pages following the process charts.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 89

Assess the debtor
Prepare documentation
File proposal documents withO. R.
CONSUMER PROPOSAL Administration process map (1)
Send notice & report to all creditors & O. R.
Meeting requested?
Proposal accepted?
Send notice ofmeeting
YES
NO
Meeting held
YES
Send notice of acceptance to creditors, debtor, O. R.
 Proposal deemed accepted by creditors after 45 days
NO
Stay of proceedings lifted
Send notice to creditors, debtor, O. R.
Administrator discharged
Monitor performance of proposal
 Send notice of approval to creditors,debtor, O. R.
Monitor performance of proposal
Process map (2)
Process map (3)
Process map (3)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 90

Proposal approved?
Stay of proceedings lifted
Send notice of approval to creditors, debtor,O.R.
Send notice to creditors, debtor,O. R.
Administrator discharged
Court reviewrequested
Request hearing date
YES
Proposal deemed approved by court after 15 days
NO
Court hearing held
Send notice & report to O. R. & court; only notice to creditors
YES
NO
Monitor performance ofproposal
CONSUMER PROPOSAL Administration process map (2)
Process map (3)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 91

*
Default of a Proposal is discussed more fully in Module 15
Proposal default?
YES*
Issue certificate ofcompliance
NO

Stay of proceedings lifted
 Obtain dischargeof administrator
CONSUMER PROPOSAL Administration process map (3)
May apply to court to revive
May send notice of possibility of automatic revival to creditors & O. R.
Process map (4)
Send notice to creditors & file report with O. R.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 92

*
Default of a Proposal is discussed more fully in Module 15
Proposal default?
YES*
File report with the OSB & creditors
Send notice to O.R. & creditors of non-revival
CONSUMER PROPOSAL Administration process map (4)
May apply to court to revive
May send notice of possibility of automatic revival to creditors & O. R.
Give notice to O. R. & creditors
Court orderedrevival
YES
NO
File report with the OSB & notify creditors
Stay lifted
Obtain discharge of Administrator
Stay lifted
Monitor
Issue certificate if no further default
Monitor file
Obtain discharge of Administrator
No objection
Objection

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 93
5.3. Consumer proposals
5.3.1. Definition
Consumer proposals are filed under Division II of Part III of the BIA. However, normally the
proposal is referred to as a “consumer” proposal rather than a Division II proposal.
The title of “Administrator” is given to the Trustee or a licensed administrator of consumer
proposals who administers the consumer proposal.
The purpose of the consumer proposal sections is to permit the proposals to be handled
quickly, efficiently and with a minimum of administration and cost. For example, there is no
court approval or taxation required in a consumer proposal, unless requested.
5.3.2. Who can file a consumer proposal?
BIA s. 66.11 and 66.12
The BIA states that a consumer proposal may be made by a consumer debtor. A consumer
debtor is a natural person who is bankrupt or insolvent, and who owes $250,000 or less,
excluding the mortgage on the principal residence.
5.3.3. Joint proposal
BIA s. 66.12(1.1)
Directive 2R
Two individuals can file a consumer proposal together where the debts of the individuals
making the joint proposal are substantially the same, and the Administrator is of the opinion
that it is in the best interest of the debtors and creditors to administer the proposal as a joint
proposal because of the financial relationship of the debtors.
5.3.4. Assessment
Directive 6R
The assessment process is the same as described for Division I proposals.
You must review whether a joint proposal can be made and whether the total debt load, other
than the mortgage on the principal residence, is less than $250,000. This debt load limit
would include the mortgage on a rental property and/or the lease or loan for a vehicle.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 94
5.3.5. Prepare documentation
BIA Form 47, 65, 79
The documents required in filing a consumer proposal are virtually the same as in a Division I
proposal, except there is no requirement for a Cash Flow Statement or the Trustee and
insolvent person’s reports supporting the Cash Flow Statement. However, as the Statement
of Affairs states that the budget information is attached to the Statement of Affairs, a type of
cash flow is submitted with the documents.
The following documents are to be submitted to the Official Receiver’s office:
 an assessment of an individual debtor;
 the proposal;
 a Statement of Affairs, along with the accompanying Form 65; and
 the Estate Summary Information.
If the debtor is bankrupt at the time of filing the consumer proposal, the inspectors’ approval
must also be obtained and submitted.
5.3.6. Statutory terms
BIA s. 66.12(5), 66.12(6) and 136
A consumer proposal must provide for:
 payment of preferred claims in priority to the claims of ordinary creditors;
 payment of all prescribed fees and expenses of:
 the Administrator; and
 any person in respect of counseling; and
 the method of dividend distribution.
The term of the consumer proposal cannot exceed five years.
5.3.7. Report to creditors and the Official Receiver
Form 51
Within ten days of filing the consumer proposal, the Administrator must prepare and file a
report with the Official Receiver and the creditors setting out the following:
 the results of the investigation made by the Administrator;
 the Administrator’s opinion as to whether the consumer proposal is reasonable and fair to
both the consumer debtor and the creditors;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 95
 a condensed statement of the debtor’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses; and
 a list of the creditors with claims of more than $250.
In practice, the report is sent along with the filing to the Official Receiver and with the notice
of the consumer proposal to the creditors.
5.3.8. Notice to creditors
BIA s. 66.14(b)
BIA Form 31, 37.1 and 49
Within 10 days the Administrator must send the following to every known creditor:
 a copy of the consumer proposal;
 a copy of the report referred to above;
 a copy of a blank proof of claim;
 a voting letter; and
 a notice explaining that a meeting of creditors will be called only if required under the BIA
and that a review of the consumer proposal by a court will only be made if required under
the BIA.
5.3.9. Stay of proceedings and unsecured creditors
BIA s. 69.2
Upon the filing of a consumer proposal, no creditor has any remedy against the debtor or the
debtor’s property or can continue any action for the recovery of a claim provable in
bankruptcy until:
 the consumer proposal has been withdrawn, refused, annulled or deemed annulled; or
 the Administrator has been discharged.
5.3.10. Secured creditors
BIA s. 69.2 (4)
A secured creditor is only bound by a consumer proposal if he files a proof of security. If he
does so, and the proposal is accepted by the creditors, he is bound by the proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 96
5.3.11. Duties of the Administrator
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 8
An Administrator who agrees to assist a consumer debtor must:
 investigate the consumer debtor’s property and financial affairs so as to be able to
assess, with reasonable accuracy, the consumer debtor’s financial situation and the
causes of his insolvency;
 provide counselling in accordance with the directives issued by the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy;
 prepare a consumer proposal in prescribed form; and
 file a copy of the consumer proposal signed by the debtor with the Official Receiver.
The Administrator is also an officer of the court and is not a representative of the debtor.
CAIRP has established Standard of Professional Practice 8 which set out the duties of an
Administrator in a consumer proposal.
5.3.12. Voting
BIA s. 66.18 and 66.19
BIA Rule 97
The consumer proposal does not require that creditors vote to accept it. It is deemed to be
accepted after the expiration of 45 days from the date of filing the proposal unless creditors
request a meeting of creditors, at which point a vote will be held.
5.3.13. Proofs of claim and voting letters
Form 31 and 36
Should a creditor wish to vote in the proposal, he must file a proof of claim and voting letter.
5.3.14. Requirement for meeting of creditors
BIA s. 66.15, 105 and 106
Directive 22R
A meeting of creditors must be called by the Administrator if creditors, holding at least 25% of
the claims proven, request it.
The Official Receiver can also request a meeting of the creditors to consider the consumer
proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 97
If a meeting of creditors is held, the creditors who have filed proofs of claim may, by an
ordinary resolution vote, agree to accept the proposal: that is, a creditor receives one vote for
every dollar of his claim and a simple majority is all that is required. The creditors who vote
can be present in person or by proxy, or can have submitted a voting letter. To assess
whether or not the proposal is accepted, the decision is made only by the creditors who have
voted (i.e., the claims of the creditors who abstain are not counted in the totals as either a
“for” or “against” vote).
The proposal can also be amended at the meeting, but only if the debtor agrees.
If there is no quorum at the meeting of creditors, the proposal is deemed to be accepted by
the creditors. Directive 22R, with respect to Proofs of Claim, Proxies, Quorums and Voting at
Meeting of Creditors, states that a quorum is established by considering the number of
creditors having filed their claim prior to the time for the meeting, present at the meeting in
person, or represented by proxy or by voting letter.
5.3.15. Non-acceptance of the proposal
A consumer proposal differs from a Division I proposal in that an automatic bankruptcy does
not occur if the proposal is not accepted by the creditors, except where the consumer
proposal was made by someone who was already a bankrupt (in which case that person
becomes bankrupt again).
Default of a proposal is discussed more fully in Module 16.
5.3.16. Deemed approval by the court
BIA s. 66.22(1)
The proposal is deemed approved by the court 15 days after the acceptance (deemed or
otherwise) by the creditors, unless the Official Receiver, or some other interested party,
requires that an application be made to court for approval.
5.3.17. Procedure for application to court
BIA s. 66.23
When an application has been requested, the Administrator must:
 send notice of the hearing at least 15 days prior to the hearing to:
 the consumer debtor;
 every proven creditor; and
 the Official Receiver;
 file a report on the consumer proposal and the conduct of the consumer debtor with the
court; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 98
 forward a copy of the report to the Official Receiver at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
5.3.18. Counselling
BIA s. 66.13(2)(b)
Directive 1R
Debtors making a consumer proposal must attend the mandatory two counselling sessions in
order to receive a Certificate of Full Performance.
5.3.19. Interim dividends
As with a Division I proposal, there are interim dividends paid to proven creditors throughout
the term of the proposal. The proposal will set out the terms of payment to the creditors.
Payments to proven creditors every three months can be a costly endeavor in a consumer
proposal. The payment of dividends every six months or year is much more practical.
5.3.20. Certificate of Full Performance
BIA s. 66.38
BIA Form 46
The insolvent person will receive his Certificate of Full Performance once all terms of the
proposal have been met and he has attended the requisite counselling sessions.
5.3.21. Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements
BIA Rule 129, Form 14
Once the Certificate of Full Performance has been issued and the Administrator has received
all funds to be paid in the proposal, the Administrator will prepare the Statement of Receipts
and Disbursements and dividend sheet. These are sent to the Office of the Superintendent
for comment, along with the approval of the inspector, if one was appointed.
For a consumer proposal, fee structure is based on a tariff. There is no need for taxation by
the court unless requested by the Office of the Superintendent.
Once the Administrator has received the letter of comment from the Office of the
Superintendent, Notice of Deemed Taxation of the Administrator’s Accounts and Discharge
of the Administrator is sent to every proven creditor, with a copy of the Final Statement of
Receipts and Disbursements and dividend sheet.
If a creditor does not object in 30 days, the Administrator will be deemed to be discharged,
within three months of the day on which the notice was sent.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 99
5.3.22. Trustee/Administrator discharge
BIA s. 66.39, Form 16
Once the three months have passed and the cheques have cleared the bank, the Trustee is
deemed to be discharged.
5.3.23. Discharge of debts
BIA s. 173
Once the insolvent person receives his Certificate of Full Performance, the balance of any
debt owing by the insolvent person is discharged, except for those claims that would not be
discharged by an order of discharge in a bankruptcy (unless the creditors that have
undischargeable debts have specifically voted in favor of a proposal that clearly provides that
these debts will be discharged).
5.3.24. Credit bureau
A proposal will result in an 7 rating rather than an 9 rating on the credit bureau report for
three years from the date of the full performance. Creditors reviewing the credit bureau report
will know that if the insolvent person filed a proposal, the creditors received a better
distribution than in a bankruptcy.
5.3.25. No stay of proceedings
BIA s. 66.37
The stay of proceedings is no longer applicable once a consumer proposal, or the amended
consumer proposal, has been withdrawn, refused, annulled or deemed annulled.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 100
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
6. Prepare Documents for OSB; Submit

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 101
Table of Contents
6. PREPARE DOCUMENTS FOR OSB; SUBMIT ... 100
6.1. Introduction ... 103
6.2. Document Preparation ... 103
6.2.1. Review information given by debtor ... 103
6.2.2. Size of family ... 103
6.2.3. Assets and liabilities ... 103
6.2.4. Income and expenses ... 104
6.3. Obtain Trustee’s assessment ... 104
6.3.1. Ordinary or summary administration \ bankruptcy or proposa ... 104
6.4. Prepare documents required ... 106
6.4.1. Summary administration ... 106
6.4.2. Ordinary administration ... 107
6.4.3. Division I proposal: ... 109
6.5. Review and share with Trustee ... 110
6.5.1. Review all forms for accuracy ... 110
6.5.2. Share with Trustee ... 110
6.6. Obtain debtor’s and Trustee’s signature ... 110
6.6.1. Debtor’s signature ... 110
6.6.2. Trustee’s signature ... 111
6.6.3. Other forms ... 111
6.7. Submit to OSB ... 111
6.7.1. Bankruptcy forms to be sent to the OSB: ... 111
6.7.2. Proposal forms to be sent to the OSB: ... 112
6.7.3. E-filing ... 112

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 102
6.8. Certificate of Appointment ... 113
6.8.1. Follow up receipt of the appointment with Trustee ... 113
6.9. Send notices and other documents to creditors ... 113
6.9.1. Summary ... 113
6.9.2. Ordinary... 114
Appendix A ... 116
Appendix B ... 117
Appendix C ... 119
Appendix D ... 120

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 103
6.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, the student will be able to:
 Prepare appropriate documents for summary or ordinary administration in either a
bankruptcy or a proposal.
 Obtain appropriate signatures from the Trustee and the debtor.
 File documents with the OSB.
 Review the Certificate of Appointment received from the OSB for correctness.
Assigned reading
 BIA s. 2, 49, 50(6), 50.4(1), 50.4(2), 51, 66.12(1-2), 66.13(2), 66.14, 66.15(3), 66.32,
102(1)&(4), 155(d.1)& (h), 158(d), 168(a), 168.1(1), 178(2) and 243(2)
 BIA Forms 1, 21, 29 - 31, 33, 37, 47, 48, 65, 66, 68 - 70, 73, 78, 79 and 92
 Directives 2R, 3, 9R3, 11R2, 23 and 24
 BIA Rule 4
 Appendices to this Module A through D
6.2. Document Preparation
6.2.1. Review information given by debtor
Directive 11R2
CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice No. 6
6.2.2. Size of family
The number of members in a family unit will be used in the determination of surplus income.
The bankrupt’s family unit includes, in addition to the bankrupt, any person who resides in the
same household and who benefits from either the expenses incurred or income earned by
the bankrupt, or who contributes to such expenses or earnings. A person who does not
reside in the same household is also considered a member of the family unit if the person
benefits from or contributes to the expenses incurred or income earned by the bankrupt.
6.2.3. Assets and liabilities
The assets must be reviewed to ensure that any encumbrances are also included on the
Statement of Affairs.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 104
Review the liabilities to ensure that secured debts are linked properly to the asset(s) to which
they relate and that no liabilities have been omitted.
It is usually prudent to conduct a PPSA search to determine if there are any security
registrations on any of the assets prior to any filing or, as the case may be, identify assets
that the debtor may have forgotten to mention, such as a leased vehicle (a search in the
RDPRM in Quebec).
6.2.4. Income and expenses
Form 65, Directive 11R
Review income and expenses to determine if there will be surplus income payments
required.
Prepare a comparison schedule of the realization in a bankruptcy vs. proposal scenario.
The OSB Directive 11R2 sets out the amount of surplus income to be paid.
Ensure that there is a corresponding expense for any secured asset which the debtor wishes
to retain (i.e., mortgage on a principal residence, vehicle, etc.).
6.3. Obtain Trustee’s assessment
6.3.1. Ordinary or summary administration \ bankruptcy or proposal
BIA s. 49.1, 66.12(1 -2), and 66.32
Directive 6R
Review with the Trustee to determine how the estate is to be filed.
Bankruptcy
Ordinary administration:
The debtor must be an insolvent person (as defined in the BIA), which means that he/she/it
must not be an undischarged bankrupt, has to have debts of at least $1,000 and that
he/she/it must reside, carry on business or have property in Canada. In order for an estate to
be filed as an ordinary administration, the debtor must be:
 a corporation or an income trust;
 an individual, with realizable assets over $15,000; or
 an individual, with realizable assets under $15,000 if the Trustee believes that there will
be extraordinary costs or time involved.
Summary administration:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 105
In order for an estate to be filed as a summary administration, the following criteria must be
met. The bankrupt must:
 be an individual;
 be resident, have property or carry on business in Canada;
 have debts of a least $1,000;
 have realizable value of assets under $15,000; and
 not be an undischarged bankrupt.
Proposal
Division I Proposal:
The following persons may file a Division I proposal:
 an insolvent corporation or income trust;
 an insolvent individual with debts over $250,000 (excluding mortgage on principal
residence);
 a receiver within the meaning of BIA, but only in relation to an insolvent person;
 a liquidator of an insolvent person’s property; or
 a Trustee of the estate of a bankrupt.
An individual who has filed a consumer proposal may not file a Division I proposal until the
Administrator under the consumer proposal has been discharged.
Consumer Proposal:
The following criteria must be met to file a consumer proposal. The debtor:
 must be an insolvent or bankrupt individual;
 must be resident, have property or carry on business in Canada;
 must have debts of a least $1,000 and less than $250,000 (excluding mortgage on
principal residence);
 who has filed an Notice of Intention (“NOI”) or lodged a proposal under Division I may not
make a consumer proposal, until the Trustee appointed in respect thereof has been
discharged; and
 who has filed a consumer proposal which was annulled, or deemed to be annulled, may
not make another consumer proposal until all claims for which proofs of claim were filed
(in the first consumer proposal) are paid or extinguished, unless otherwise ordered by the
court.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 106
6.4. Prepare documents required
6.4.1. Summary administration
BIA s. 49, 66.13(2), 66.14 and 158
BIA Forms 21, 65 and 79 (Summary Administration), BIA Forms 47, 48, 65, 79 (Consumer Proposal)
Directives 2R, 3, 6R, 26 and 16R (pre-1992)
Appendices A – D
Bankruptcy forms:
It is possible for two people to file a joint bankruptcy assignment in such circumstances as
are specified by Directive 2R – Joint Filing. In such case, both bankrupts’ information would
be on each of the following forms and both individuals would have to sign all forms. If the
filing is not joint, then only one name would be used on each of the following forms:
 Statement of Affairs (Non-Business Bankruptcy/Proposal)
 Assets
 Liabilities
 Pertinent Information
 Income and expense form
– Information (or amended information) Concerning the Financial Situation of the
Individual Bankrupt
 Assignment for the General Benefit of Creditors (Non-Business Bankrupt)
 Assessment Certificate
 Notice to bankrupt of his duties
 Estate Information Summary
 Data Entry Sheet – Office of Superintendent (if required by local OSB office)
 Bankrupt’s Authorization for CRA (authorization for Trustee to prepare tax returns – May
not be required in all provinces)
 Bankrupt’s Acknowledgement Re: Credit Cards
 Optional:
 Acknowledgement regarding agreement to pay the Trustee’s fees
 Acknowledgement that the bankrupt must attend two counselling sessions, which
should include the time frame

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 107
Consumer proposal forms:
 Statement of Affairs (Non-business Bankruptcy/Proposal) should include:
 Assets
 Liabilities
 Pertinent Information
 Income and expense form – Cash Flow Statement
– Information (or amended information) Concerning the Financial Situation of the
Individual Bankrupt
 Assessment Certificate
 Consumer Proposal
 Notice to the debtor of his duties
 Report of Administrator on Consumer Proposal
 Estate Information Summary
 Data Entry Sheet – Office of Superintendent (if required by local OSB office)
 Optional:
 Acknowledgement that the debtor must attend two counselling sessions, which should
include the time frame.
 Acknowledgement that the debtor understands what constitutes a default in the terms
of the proposal and its possible consequences.
6.4.2. Ordinary administration
BIA s. 49(2) and 158
BIA Forms 21, 65, 78 and 79
Bankruptcy forms:
Pursuant to the BIA, a Statement of Affairs is required to be filed with the assignment. In
theory, this could be a preliminary Statement of Affairs, and the “full” Statement of Affairs
could be filed within 5 days of the assignment, however, in practice the “full” Statement of
Affairs is most often filed with the assignment. The forms will vary slightly depending upon
whether the debtor is an individual or a corporation. The forms should include:
 Statement of Affairs (Non-business Bankruptcy/Proposal), if an individual, should include:
 Assets
 Liabilities

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 108
 Pertinent information
 Income and expense form
– Information (or amended information) Concerning the Financial Situation of the
Individual Bankrupt
 Statement of Affairs (Business Bankruptcy/Proposal), if a company, should include:
 Assets
 Real estate
 Promissory notes
 Debts due to the estate
 Liabilities
 If a corporate bankruptcy, minutes of the meeting (or official resolution) of directors
authorizing the filing of the assignment in bankruptcy and naming the director to sign the
documents
 Assignment for the General Benefit of Creditors
 Assessment Certificate (if an individual)
 Notice to bankrupt or an officer of a bankrupt corporation of his duties
 Accounting Records Letter (Business Bankrupt)
 Estate Information Summary
 Data Entry Sheet – Office of Superintendent (if required by local OSB office)
 Bankrupt’s Authorization for CRA (authorization for Trustee to prepare tax returns -
individual) (May not be required in all provinces)
 Optional (best practice):
 Acknowledgement regarding agreement to pay Trustee’s fees (individual) (Appendix
A)
 Acknowledgement that the bankrupt must attend two counselling sessions, which
should include the time frame (individual) (Appendix B)
 Acknowledgement that bankrupt has given all credit cards for which he is responsible
(individual) to the Trustee, or has destroyed the credit cards (Appendix C).
Occasionally, the bankruptcy will result from a bankruptcy order instead of an assignment. In
such a case, the same documents would be required except, of course, the assignment
document, the resolution of the board of directors authorizing the assignment (for a company)
and the assessment certificate (for an individual). In such a case, the documents would need
to be filed within 5 days following the bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 109
6.4.3. Division I proposal:
BIA s. 50(6) and 50.4(1 -2)
BIA Forms 29, 30, 33, 78 and 79
Appendix D
CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice – No. 6, 9 and 11 BIA Rule 129, Form 14

Notice of Intention forms:
 Notice of Intention (NOI)
 If an incorporated company: Minutes of the meeting (or official resolution) of Directors
authorizing the filing of the proposal and naming the director to sign the documents
 Trustee’s Consent to Act in the Proposal
 Notice to bankrupt or an officer of a bankrupt corporation of his duties
 Estate Information Summary
 List of creditors, including names, addresses, account numbers and amounts owed
 In addition, a Cash Flow Statement, together with a list of assumptions, the
representations of the debtor, and a report of the Trustee on the reasonableness of the
Cash Flow Statement, will have to be filed within 10 days of the Notice of Intention.
Additional documents, including amended Cash Flow Statements and reports, may need to
be filed throughout the period of the Notice of Intention, depending on the circumstances and
the progress of the proceedings.
Proposal forms:
 Cash flow statements together with a list of assumptions, the representations of the
debtor and a report from the Trustee on the reasonableness of the Cash Flow Statements
 Statement of Affairs (Non-business Bankruptcy/Proposal), if an individual. This is the
same form as that used for a bankruptcy. (See the section above for the information it
should contain.)
 Statement of Affairs (Business Bankruptcy/Proposal), if a company. This is the same form
as that used for a bankruptcy. (See the section above for the information it should
contain.)
 Minutes of the Meeting (or official resolution) of Directors authorizing the filing of the
proposal and naming the director to sign the documents (company)
 Assessment Certificate (individual)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 110
 Division I Proposal
 Report of Trustee on Proposal, if sufficient information is available to prepare it. If the
information is not sufficient, this document needs to be prepared as early as possible
before the meeting of creditors, and ideally should be provided to the creditors no later
than at the time of sending the notice of the meeting of creditors.
 Notice to bankrupt or an officer of a bankrupt corporation of his duties
 Estate Information Summary
 Optional:
 Acknowledgement that the debtor must attend two counselling sessions, which should
include the time frame (individual).
6.5. Review and share with Trustee
6.5.1. Review all forms for accuracy
Review Statement of Affairs to ensure that all assets and liabilities are listed.
Ensure that all encumbered assets are linked to the liabilities/encumbrances.
Ensure that expenses for secured assets which the bankrupt is retaining are listed on the
income and expense form.
Compare income to Superintendent’s Standards to ensure that proper amount is noted for
any surplus payments to be made to the Trustee (bankruptcy only).
6.5.2. Share with Trustee
Review all forms with the Trustee to ensure that nothing was omitted and that the file is going
to be filed properly (Summary vs. Ordinary Administration or Bankruptcy vs. Proposal)
For ordinary bankruptcies and Division I proposals, discuss with the Trustee the location,
date and time for the creditors’ meeting and the chairperson.
Creditors meetings are not required for summary bankruptcies or consumer proposals,
unless requested. The requirements for the requests for creditors meeting are detailed in
Module 3.
6.6. Obtain debtor’s and Trustee’s signature
6.6.1. Debtor’s signature
Determine date and time for the Trustee and yourself to meet with the debtor to obtain
signatures and finalize all forms. Some (most) of the forms represent a document originating
from the debtor (for example, a declaration of the debtor’s assets and liabilities, a disclosure

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 111
of his revenues and expenses, a proposal to his creditors, an acknowledgement of duties,
etc.) and the debtor is required to sign these.
6.6.2. Trustee’s signature
The Trustee is required to perform the assessment of the debtor in person, unless the debtor
lives in a designated area, and the Trustee is required to sign the following:
 Estate Information Summary
 Assessment Certificate
 Income and Expense Form
 Consent to Act in a Division I Proposal
 Trustee’s report on Cash Flow
6.6.3. Other forms
 The Statement of Affairs must be sworn (or made under solemn declaration) before a
commissioner for oaths.
 Assignment for the General Benefit of Creditors (for a bankruptcy), the proposal (for a
proposal) and Notice of Bankrupt Duties must be signed before a witness who knows the
debtor. The person witnessing the signature must also sign the documents. These
documents do not need to be signed by the Trustee.
6.7. Submit to OSB
6.7.1. Bankruptcy forms to be sent to the OSB:
Directive 9R
 Statement of Affairs, including Income and Expense Form (Non-business or Business
Bankruptcy/Proposal)
 Assessment Certificate (individuals only)
 Notice to Bankrupt or an Officer of a Bankrupt Corporation of His Duties (if required by
local OSB office)
 Assignment for the General Benefit of Creditors
 Estate Information Summary
 Data Entry Sheet – Office of Superintendent (if required by local OSB office)
 Minutes of the Meeting (or official resolution) of Directors authorizing the filing of the
assignment in bankruptcy and naming the director to sign the documents (company only)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 112
6.7.2. Proposal forms to be sent to the OSB:
 NOI, Trustee’s Consent Form, List of Creditors, Minutes of Directors and Estate
Information Summary (if an NOI is being filed)
 Statement of Affairs
 Income and Expense Form required for an individual
 Proposal (Consumer Proposal or Division I Proposal)
 Report of the Administrator (Consumer Proposal)
 Report of the Trustee (Division I Proposal) (This document need not be completed and
sent to the OSB at the time of filing. See the comments made previously in section 6.4.3)
 Assessment Certificate (individual)
 Estate Information Summary
 Data Entry Sheet – Office of Superintendent (if required by local OSB office)
 Cash Flow Statement, together with accompanying assumptions, representations and
report of the Trustee.
Cash Flow Statements and accompanying documents must be received by the OSB no later
than 10 days after the filing of the NOI, or concurrently with the filing of the Division I
Proposal. If the Cash Flow Statements are not filed in the time frame required after the NOI
there is a deemed assignment in bankruptcy. The filing of the proposal will not be considered
complete if the Cash Flow Statement is not filed at the same time.
If an NOI is filed, the proposal must be received by the OSB no later than thirty days after the
filing of the NOI, unless an extension for the filing is obtained from the court before the expiry
of the delay to file the proposal. If the proposal is not filed in the time frame required, or if no
extension is requested, there is a deemed assignment in bankruptcy immediately after the
delay has expired.
Time frames for filing of documents in a proposal were detailed in Module 4 and Module 5.
Determine which OSB office to file the documents with, based upon the location of the
debtor. If unsure, discuss this with the Trustee.
6.7.3. E-filing
Directive 9R
Electronic filing is mandatory for all new bankruptcy estates (whether summary or ordinary)
and proposals (whether Division I or Division II) that are submitted by trustees and
Administrators and for all subsequent prescribed documents submitted for these estates that
are accepted by the OSB's electronic filing system (the exceptions are outlined below).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 113
During a service interruption, for example, a power outage or a system malfunction, trustees
should use alternative methods of filing after contacting the Official Receiver to discuss the
proper protocol to follow.
For insolvency proceedings that cannot be electronically submitted, documents pertaining to
those proceedings should be filed in person, or sent by mail, courier or fax. These
proceedings are:
 partnership assignments and partnership proposals;
 receiverships under Part XI of the Act; and
 assignments deriving from bankruptcy orders.
6.8. Certificate of Appointment
6.8.1. Follow up receipt of the appointment with Trustee
Within 24 to 48 hours, the Certificate of Appointment should be received from the OSB. If this
is not received, it will be necessary to follow up with the OSB to determine if there was a
problem with the forms filed. If e-filing the documents, the Certificate of Appointment should
download automatically and almost immediately.
Review the Certificate of Appointment to ensure that the requested date, time, and location
for the creditors’ meeting are correct.
6.9. Send notices and other documents to creditors
6.9.1. Summary
BIA s. 51(1), 66.15(3) and 155
BIA Forms 31, 36, 37.1, 48, 49, 65, 69, 70 and 79
Bankruptcy forms:
 Notice to creditors:
 Notice of Bankruptcy and of Impending Automatic Discharge of Bankrupt, and
Request of a First Meeting of Creditors (if a first or second time bankrupt), or
 Notice of Bankruptcy and Request of a First Meeting of Creditors (for third time or
more previous bankruptcies)
 Statement of Affairs, including Income and Expense Form
 Proof of Claim Form
 Copies of all above documents are also sent to the bankrupt

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 114
Consumer proposal forms:
 Notice of Consumer Proposal
 Consumer Proposal
 Report of the Administrator
 Statement of Affairs, including Statement of Income and Expenses
 Proof of Claim form
 Voting Letter
 Copies of all above documents are also sent to the debtor
6.9.2. Ordinary, Notice of Intention and Division One Proposals
BIA s. 51, 102(1), 155 and 168.1(4)
BIA Forms 31, 33, 36, 37, 40, 66, 68, 73, 78 and 92
Directives 23 and 24
Bankruptcy Forms:
 Notice to creditors:
 Notice of Bankruptcy and First Meeting of Creditors together with the Notice of
Impending Automatic Discharge (if a first or second time bankrupt) (Form 69); or
 Notice of First Meeting (Form 70) for if third time bankrupt or greater. Notice of
Hearing for Discharge should be sent when a date is set; or
 Notice of Bankruptcy, First Meeting of Creditors (for corporations) (Form 68)
 Statement of Affairs (for both corporations and individuals), including Income and
Expense Form (for individuals)
 Proof of Claim form
 Proxy form
 Copies of all documents above should be sent to the bankrupt together with the Notice to
Bankrupt of Meeting of Creditors
 A notice must be published in a local newspaper
Notice of Intention:
 If an NOI was filed, you are required to send the NOI, Trustee’s Consent Form and List of
Creditors owed over $250 to all creditors
 Copies of all documents above should be sent to the debtor.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 115
Division I proposals:
 Notice of Proposal to creditors
 Division I proposal
 Report of Trustee
 Statement of Affairs
 Proof of Claim form
 Proxy form
 Voting Letter
 Copies of all above documents should be sent to the debtor

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 116
Appendix A

Agreement to Pay

I/we, name of bankrupt(s), hereby agree to pay to the Licensed Insolvency Trustee, name of
LIT, the sum of $, to be paid enter terms of payment.

I/we understand that cheques which are returned by the bank for any reason must be
replaced with cash, certified cheque or money order, plus any bank charges. I/we understand
that failure to pay the above amount in full will result in the automatic objection to my/our
discharge from bankruptcy by the Trustee.

Dated this day of , 20

Bankrupt’s signature Signature of Licensed
 Insolvency Trustee

Joint bankrupt’s signature (if applicable)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 117
Appendix B
Counselling Sessions
Name of bankrupt:
Date of sign-up:

First counselling session
To be held at:

Second counselling session
To be held at:

I/we have been advised by my/our Licensed Insolvency Trustee that the:
1. First counselling session is to be completed between ten (10) and ninety (90)
days following the date of the initial bankruptcy event or the filing of a
consumer proposal.
2. Second counselling session is to be completed before the discharge date and
at least after 30 days following the first counselling session

I/we agree to attend both of these counselling sessions. I/we understand that I am/we are not
entitled to an automatic discharge from bankruptcy if I/we fail to attend, or fail to reschedule
and attend a missed counselling session.

Dated this day of , 20

Bankrupt’s signature Signature of
Licensed Insolvency Trustee

Joint bankrupt’s signature (if applicable)

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 118

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 119
Appendix C
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
RE: CREDIT CARDS

I/we name of bankrupt(s), hereby acknowledge the following:

 I/we have given the Licensed Insolvency Trustee all credit cards for which I
am/we are directly or indirectly responsible for payment.

OR

 I/we have returned all credit cards to the appropriate company prior to filing for
bankruptcy and I am /we are no longer in possession of any credit cards.

OR

 I/we do not have any credit cards or I/we have destroyed all credit cards

I/we understand that a false declaration with respect to the aforementioned may constitute an
offence under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.

Bankrupt’s signature Date

Joint bankrupt’s signature (if applicable) Witness’ signature

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 120
Appendix D

Consent of Licensed Insolvency Trustee

To: Name of individual (corporation) filing NOI

Re: Proposal under Part III of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act

From: Name of Licensed Insolvency Trustee

Name of LIT, hereby consents to act as Trustee under a proposal to be made by name of
individual (corporation) filing NOI, to its creditors under the provisions of Part III of the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.

 DATED this day of , 20

 Name of Licensed Insolvency Trustee
 Per:

 Signature of Licensed Insolvency
Trustee

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 121
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
7. Proofs of Claim

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 122
Table of Contents
7. PROOFS OF CLAIM ... 121
7.1. Introduction ... 123
7.1.1. Creditor’s rights ... 123
7.1.2. In a proposal ... 124
7.1.3. Provable claims ... 124
7.1.4. Proving a claim ... 124
7.1.5. The Proof of claim ... 124
7.2. Form 31 ... 125
7.2.1. Details of Form 31 ... 125
7.2.2. Schedule A - Statement of Account ... 125
7.2.3. Voting rights ... 126
7.3. Admitting and disallowing claims ... 126
7.3.1. Trustee’s decision ... 126
7.3.2. Questions to ask ... 126
7.3.3. Notice of Disallowance ... 127
7.4. Creditors’ rights and obligations ... 127
7.4.1. Secured creditors ... 127
7.4.2. Security valuation ... 127
7.4.3. Demand by creditor ... 127
7.4.4. Information request ... 127
7.4.5. Dividend distribution ... 128
7.4.6. Preferred status ... 128
7.4.7. Pro rata... 128
7.4.8. The levy ... 128

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 123
7.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Explain the elements required in a proof of claim.
 Determine whether to recommend admitting or disallowing a claim to the Trustee.
 Protect the estate’s interests while still allowing secured creditors the full extent of their
rights.
Assigned readings
 BIA Sections 4, 81, 95, 121 – 147, 163, 170 and 178
 BIA Forms 31, 36 – 37, 37.1 and 74 – 77
 BIA Rules 112, 113 and 123
 Directive 11R and 22R
 CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice No. 6
7.1.1. Creditor’s rights
BIA s. 81, 128, 161, 163 and 170
The BIA is designed to allow the creditors, within their class, as much input and control as
possible over the bankruptcy process. The BIA ensures creditors receive a fair and equitable
distribution of the bankrupt’s property or distribution in the proposal. The Proof of Claim is the
document which establishes a creditor’s rights and status. Having proved a claim to the
Trustee, a creditor may:
 establish his right to the bankrupt’s property;
 establish his right to his own property;
 participate and vote at meetings of creditors;
 vote on the Trustee’s appointment and the appointment of inspectors;
 be notified of material changes in the bankrupt’s financial circumstances;
 inspect the Trustee’s estate files;
 have the bankrupt examined under the BIA;
 review all the other claims and object to them if he see fit;
 obtain copies of the Trustee’s report on the bankrupt’s discharge;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 124
 oppose the bankrupt’s discharge;
 receive the Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements;
 object to the Trustee’s discharge; and
 receive a dividend.
Having failed or neglected to prove a claim, the creditor has none of the rights listed above.
7.1.2. In a proposal
In a proposal, a claim establishes the creditor’s voting rights at the meeting of creditors and
his proper dividend from the debtor’s contributions.
7.1.3. Provable claims
BIA s. 121
A claim provable is any debt or liability to which the debtor was subject at the date of the
bankruptcy (or proposal), in other words, what was owed at the date of bankruptcy or
proposal. This would include debts that are not released by a discharge.
7.1.4. Proving a claim
BIA s. 124
To be entitled to participate in the bankruptcy or proposal process all creditors are required to
prove their claim. Those creditors who do not prove their claim will not be entitled to
participate and therefore unable to receive a dividend. The onus is on the creditor to establish
a right to a dividend and any of the other rights a creditor can claim in a bankruptcy or
proposal.
7.1.5. The Proof of claim
BIA Form 31
The proof of claim addresses a number of important questions which determine a claimant’s
status. The Trustee must be satisfied that the claimant has properly responded to these
questions before he can admit the claim. Until a claim is admitted, the claimant does not have
creditor status.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 125
7.2. Form 31
BIA Form 31
Directive 22R
7.2.1. Details of Form 31
The proof of claim must identify the following:
1. The debtor/bankrupt and the date of bankruptcy or proposal;
2. The creditor and the person submitting the claim (if not the creditor);
3. The amount owed to the creditor;
4. The nature of the indebtedness - secured, unsecured, preferred, landlord, agricultural or
directorship claim;
A secured creditor claims a right to some part of the bankrupt’s property. A preferred
claim establishes that creditor’s right to be paid in full in priority to the other unsecured
creditors. An unsecured claim entitles the creditor to a dividend “pro rata” or in proportion
of his claim. Each class has its own rights.
5. The nature and value of any security held;
A secured claim must identify the security and state the value which the creditor believes
the security is worth at the date of bankruptcy.
6. Whether the creditor, is or is not, related to the bankrupt;
The relationship between the creditor and bankrupt has various consequences. Someone
related to the bankrupt may be restricted in his voting rights and in his right to a dividend,
even though it is a legitimate debt. The BIA defines related persons.
7. All payments received from the bankrupt/debtor in the three months prior (if related, 12
months) to the bankruptcy or proposal;
Payments made to the creditor by the bankrupt in the three months preceding the date of
the initial bankruptcy event (12 months for related parties) may be found to be
preferential. The Trustee may try to recover such payments for the estate.
8. The claim form allows the creditor to request certain information about the bankrupt’s
financial circumstances and the Trustee’s report on the bankrupt’s discharge (s. 170
Report).
7.2.2. Schedule A - Statement of Account
The creditor must back up his claim with proof of the debt. This may consist of a contract,
promissory note or a credit card’s monthly invoice. It must include a Statement of Account to
show how the creditor arrived at the amount owing. The schedule must include the date,

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 126
number and amount of all charges, credits and payments on the account in the previous
three months.
7.2.3. Voting rights
Only unsecured creditors may vote at a meeting of creditors. A creditor who is only partially
secured may vote for the unsecured part of his claim. Some creditors may be restricted in
their voting rights notwithstanding the fact that they hold an unsecured claim. These
restrictions were described in Module 3 previously in this text.
7.3. Admitting and disallowing claims
BIA s. 135
7.3.1. Trustee’s decision
Once a claim is filed, an Administrator will often be tasked with reviewing the claim and
advising the Trustee of any reason to disallow the claim. However, the final decision to allow
or disallow a claim rests with the Trustee.
7.3.2. Questions to ask
Some of the questions to be determined when reviewing a claim are:
 Does it properly identify both the bankrupt and the creditor?
 Does it specify the amount owing?
 Does it specify the nature or class of the debt, i.e., secured, unsecured, etc.?
 If secured, does the claim include a copy of the contract and proof of registration?
 Does it value the security?
 Does it state the relationship?
 Does it state the payments received in the previous three months (or 12 months)?
 Is it dated, signed AND witnessed?
 Is it accompanied by a proper Statement of Account?
Any inadequacy in the information above can be dealt with by contacting the creditor and
requesting further information or corrections.
If there is a proxy, it should be signed and witnessed separately.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 127
7.3.3. Notice of Disallowance
BIA Form 77
Any official notice of disallowance is final and conclusive unless appealed to the court within
thirty days of being served (or such other period as the court will allow, if the creditor asks for
a longer delay within the 30-day period). Therefore, caution should be used on issuing any
notice of disallowance.
7.4. Creditors’ rights and obligations
7.4.1. Secured creditors
BIA s. 128
A secured creditor could essentially operate outside the bankruptcy. However, the Trustee
can demand that such a creditor prove his security. If the creditor fails to respond, the
Trustee may apply to the court to be allowed to dispose of the property for the benefit of the
estate. If the Trustee does not demand this proof, the creditor is free to do what he pleases.
The BIA allows a creditor with a security right to exercise that right independent of the
Trustee.
7.4.2. Security valuation
The importance of the security valuation on the claim form is twofold. It allows:
 the Trustee to redeem the security for the amount of the valuation or the amount owed
the creditor, whichever is less; and
 the creditor to establish his rights to vote or receive a dividend for any unsecured portion
of his claim (the difference between what is owed and what the security is worth).
7.4.3. Demand by creditor
A secured creditor may insist that the Trustee decide whether or not to redeem the security. If
the Trustee fails to respond within 30 days, the creditor will be free to do as he wishes with
the property in question.
7.4.4. Information request
A creditor may request information by checking the appropriate box near the bottom of the
claim form. He can ask to be notified of any change in the bankrupt’s financial circumstances
as they relate to surplus income and a recommendation made by the Trustee, and/or receive
a copy of the Trustee Report on the Bankrupt’s Application for Discharge.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 128
7.4.5. Dividend distribution
Whether in a bankruptcy or proposal, the admission of a claim establishes the creditor’s right
to share in the dividend distributions made by the Trustee. However, creditors may have
different standings in this regard. The BIA governs the dividend distribution.

7.4.6. Preferred status
BIA s. 136
A creditor whose claim falls within any of the categories mentioned in s.136 of the BIA is
referred to as a preferred creditor. This entitles him to be paid in priority to the other
unsecured creditors.
7.4.7. Pro rata
After all the preferred creditors have been paid, the rest of the creditors (referred to as
unsecured) share the rest of the money in proportion of what their debt is to the total amount
of the unsecured debt.
Example: If a creditor is owed $1,000 and the total unsecured proven claims are $12,000,
that creditor will receive 8.333% of the dividend (i.e., $1,000/$12,000 X Dividend Amount =
8.333% X Dividend Amount).
7.4.8. The Levy
BIA Rule 123
Service Fees Act
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy is entitled to a levy on the dividend a creditor receives.
The levy is used to help defray the expenses of the supervision of the Superintendent
of Bankruptcy. In a summary administration, the levy consists of the first $200 of
dividend available to the creditors. In all other types of insolvency appointments the
levy will vary in accordance with Rule 123.
The Service Fee Act provides for the possibility of an annual adjustment. Beginning
March, 31 2020 the levy will be subject to an annual adjustment. The adjustment will
take place on March 31st of each year and based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
The $200 levy will be considered as the base (up until March 30th, 2020) and then
adjustments will be in effect on March 31st of each subsequent year.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 129
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
8. Trustee’s Preliminary Report

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 130
Table of Contents
8. TRUSTEE’S PRELIMINARY REPORT ... 129
8.1. Introduction ... 131
8.2. Determine need to prepare preliminary report ... 131
8.2.1. Creditors’ meeting ... 131
8.3. Significance of the preliminary report ... 131
8.3.1. Purpose of the meeting of creditors ... 131
8.4. Gather information known to date ... 132
8.4.1. Start early ... 132
8.4.2. Potential sources of information for the report:... 132
8.4.3. Assets ... 132
8.4.4. Financial affairs ... 133
8.4.5. Debts ... 134
8.4.6. Projections ... 134
8.5. Finalizing the report ... 135
8.5.1. Initial review with the Trustee ... 135
8.5.2. Final preparation ... 135
8.5.3. Distribution ... 135

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 131
8.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Determine when it is necessary to prepare a preliminary report (“report”).
 Collect the information necessary for the report.
 Prepare a concise and informative report for review and signature by the responsible
Trustee.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 21, 67(2), 81, 95 - 99, 101 and 102, 102(5), 105(d.1) and 155(d.1)
 Directive 30
8.2. Determine need to prepare preliminary report
8.2.1. Creditors’ meeting
BIA s.102 and 155
Directive 30
A meeting of creditors is mandatory in an ordinary administration bankruptcy. Under a
summary administration bankruptcy a meeting will only be required if the Official Receiver or
creditors who have in aggregate at least 25% in value of proven claims request one.
At the meeting of creditors held for an ordinary administration bankruptcy the Trustee is
required to submit a preliminary report. If a creditors’ meeting is required to be called in a
summary administration bankruptcy, or if the administration is very simple and
straightforward, the report may be made verbally.
There are separate reporting requirements for proposals which are discussed in Module 9.
8.3. Significance of the preliminary report
8.3.1. Purpose of the meeting of creditors
BIA s. 102(5)
The purpose of the meeting of creditors is to consider the affairs of the bankrupt, affirm the
appointment of the Trustee or substitute the Trustee with another, to appoint inspectors and
for the creditors to give directions to the Trustee with regards to the administration of the
bankruptcy. A report contributes to the success of the meeting as it provides:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 132
 information regarding the bankrupt’s financial affairs;
 a review of the Trustee’s initial actions;
 information for the creditors upon which to base their decisions; and
 a basis for the creditors to give directions to the Trustee.
8.4. Gather information known to date
8.4.1. Start early
The initial review required to prepare a report may identify preliminary steps that should be
completed before the creditors’ meeting. If the initial review is completed on the eve of the
creditors’ meeting, there may be insufficient time to resolve the issues so it is prudent to
begin preparing the report ahead of time.
8.4.2. Potential sources of information for the report:
 Statement of Affairs
 the initial standardized data collection form
 the bankrupt’s books & records, tax returns / assessments, bank records, income
information and financial statements
 notes taken during initial consultation(s)
 proofs of claim filed by creditors
 if a summary administration, the creditor who requested the meeting
 inventory counts and appraisals of the assets
 insurance documents
 bankrupt’s lawyer, accountants and other professional advisors
 the bankrupt (or representatives if corporate).
8.4.3. Assets
The Statement of Affairs should be a starting point for gathering the information regarding the
bankrupt’s assets. The BIA requires the Trustee to verify the Statement of Affairs. All assets
listed on the statement, or subsequently identified by the Trustee, must be included and
commented upon in the report. Actions taken by the Trustee and information obtained
regarding these assets must be disclosed.
Categories of assets include but are not limited to:
 real estate;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 133
 inventory, stock in trade;
 machinery, equipment;
 office equipment;
 accounts receivable or other debts owed to the bankrupt;
 investments;
 cash in bank or on hand;
 motor vehicles; and
 patents, copyrights, trademarks.
Actions may include:
 physically securing the assets;
 placing insurance;
 counting and documenting assets;
 liquidation of perishable or rapidly depreciating assets;
 continuing business operations;
 issuing notification letters to the account debtors to send payments to the Trustee; and
 returning third party assets.
Information obtained from others includes:
 appraisals or valuations of the assets;
 PPSA or RDPRM search;
 obtaining a legal opinion as to the validity of security/encumbrances registered against
these assets;
 copies of documentation of security interests and other priority claims; and
 potential market/purchasers for the business and/or assets.
8.4.4. Financial affairs
BIA s. 95 - 99 and 101
The financial affairs of the bankrupt must be investigated and reported on. The Trustee
needs to report what has been done in this regard prior to the creditors’ meeting, what issues
have been identified and what further action is planned/required.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 134
In particular, the Trustee is attempting to identify and report the issues involving preferences
and transfers at undervalue, pursuant to sections 95 – 101 of the BIA.
8.4.5. Debts
BIA s. 67(2), 81, 81.1, 81.2 and 136(1)
Part of verifying the Statement of Affairs is determining if the debts disclosed are complete
and accurate. There are several potential types of debts/claims that may exist in a
bankruptcy estate including:
 unsecured;
 secured;
 preferred;
 deemed trust claims;
 property claims;
 unpaid supplier debts; and
 rights for farmers, fisherman and aquaculturists.
The Trustee should compare the records of the bankrupt and the proofs of claim received
from creditors with the debts disclosed in the Statement of Affairs. The Trustee should then
comment on the completeness and accuracy of the debts in the Statement of Affairs in the
report.
It should answer questions such as:
 Are they comparable?
 Are there missing creditors?
 Are there are significant variances in the amounts or types of debt disclosed?
8.4.6. Projections
The Trustee may provide a projection of the realization from various assets and project the
potential distribution to creditors. There are risks involved with this type of reporting because
you are essentially attempting to predict the future. Assets may not sell for the estimated
value, additional costs may be incurred, unknown creditors may prove their claims, etc. Any
one of these scenarios would cause a variance in the distribution to creditors.
A properly written disclaimer or qualification statement that is tailored to the specific situation
should be included with any projection. This ensures that it is clear to the users of the
information that the projection is not fact and that the actual results will most likely vary from
the projections.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 135
8.5. Finalizing the report
8.5.1. Initial review with the Trustee
Once you have completed a draft of the report, review it with the Trustee responsible for the
file who will be attending the creditors’ meeting. Focus this review on content and do this
soon enough to allow for follow up on outstanding information and/or further actions which
the Trustee believes to be necessary. The Trustee may wish to recommend certain actions to
the creditors and request directions from creditors on certain issues in the report.
8.5.2. Final preparation
Once the content of the report is complete, its format must be your focus. The structure,
layout, grammar, spelling, etc. are all very important to ensure that the report is concise and
informative for the creditors. Once the report is complete, ask the Trustee to do a final review
and sign the original document. The Preliminary Report must be signed by a Trustee.
8.5.3. Distribution
The Trustee is responsible for distributing the report at the creditors’ meeting. Estimate the
number of creditors who will be attending the meeting and make sufficient copies for them,
the debtor, and any other parties attending the meeting. The other parties requiring a copy of
the report could include the Official Receiver, the estate’s lawyer, the debtor’s lawyer, the
media, etc., as allowed by the chairperson of the meeting. Finally, the report should be
provided to the attendees of the meeting when they arrive so that they have an opportunity to
review it prior to the start of the meeting.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 136
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
9. Trustee’s Report to Creditors in a Division I,
Consumer Proposal

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 137
Table of Contents
9. TRUSTEE’S REPORT TO CREDITORS IN A DIVISION I, CONSUMER
PROPOSAL ... 136
9.1. Introduction ... 138
9.2. Determine the report that should be prepared ... 138
9.2.1. Division I proposal ... 138
9.2.2. Consumer proposal ... 139
9.3. Gather information ... 140
9.3.1. Access to information ... 140
9.3.2. Potential sources of information ... 140
9.3.3. Division I vs. consumer proposal ... 140
9.4. Draft the report in proper form and with proper content ... 141
9.4.1. Form ... 141
9.4.2. Content – Division I proposal ... 141
9.4.3. Content – consumer proposal ... 142
9.5. Finalizing the report ... 142
9.5.1. Deadlines – Division I ... 142
9.5.2. Deadlines – consumer proposal ... 142

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 138
9.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Determine the type of report to be completed.
 Determine when the report is to be completed.
 Collect the information required for the report.
 Prepare a concise and informative report for review and signature by the responsible
Trustee.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 50-66 and 66.11-66.4
 BIA Form 48
 Directives 24 and 30
 Standards of Professional Practice No. 8 (8.5)
9.2. Determine the report that should be prepared
9.2.1. Division I proposal
BIA s. 50(5) and 50(10)
Directive 24
The BIA requires the Trustee to:
 make an appraisal/investigation of the affairs of the debtor;
 estimate the financial situation of the debtor;
 estimate the reasons for the financial difficulties; and
 report the findings to the meeting of creditors.
The BIA also provides the Trustee with a right of access to the debtor’s records to assess the
business and financial affairs and requires the Trustee to report the information to:
 the Official Receiver forthwith, if a material adverse change is ascertained;
 the court, if it orders the information; and
 the creditors.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 139
Directive 24, sets out a guideline for the preparation of the report. The appendix to the
directive lays out a format. This format should be used as a starting point and be tailored to
the specific proposal. While the BIA does not address the timing of the delivery of the report
to the creditors (except as noted below), the directive suggests that the report should be sent
to the creditors in advance of the meeting if possible, so that the creditors can make a wellinformed decision. The directive suggests that the report should be sent along with the notice
of the meeting (which notice must be sent at least 10 days before the meeting).
As indicated above, the BIA does not address the timing of the delivery of the report to the
creditors, other than to state that the report is presented to the creditors at the general
meeting to consider the proposal (section 50(5) of the BIA). There is one notable exception
however. If the proposal provides that sections 95 to 101 of the BIA will not apply to the
proposal (i.e., that the creditors will waive the right to contest preferential payments,
transactions at undervalue, dividends, redemptions of shares or other like reviewable or void
or voidable transactions), then the BIA states that the Trustee must report on the
reasonableness of such a provision, and that the report must be made available to the
creditors at least 10 days before the meeting.
The Trustee presents the report at the meeting of creditors. If the report was circulated prior
to the meeting, it is customary to provide an updated report at the meeting. It is customary for
the report to be in writing. In fact, if the proposal is a commercial proposal, Directive 24 states
that the report must be in writing.
9.2.2. Consumer proposal
BIA s. 66.14
BIA Form 48
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 8
The BIA states that the duties of an Administrator include investigating the property as well
as the financial affairs of the debtor. This enables assessment of the financial situation and
causes of insolvency.
The BIA also states the Administrator must prepare and file a report with the Official Receiver
within 10 days after filing the consumer proposal, using the prescribed Form 48 (Exhibit 1).
The report is to include:
 Administrator’s findings under 66.13 of the BIA;
 Administrator’s opinion as to whether or not the consumer proposal is reasonable and fair
to the creditors and the debtors and whether or not the debtor can perform it;
 condensed statement of the debtor’s assets, liabilities, income and expenses;
 list of creditors; and
 other information, as noted in CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No.8

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 140
This report is included with the information sent to the creditors with the Notice to Creditors of
Consumer Proposal, within 10 days after filing the consumer proposal.
9.3. Gather information
9.3.1. Access to information
BIA s. 50(10) and 66.13(1)
The BIA requires that the debtor provide the Trustee/Administrator with access to financial
information.
9.3.2. Potential sources of information
 Statement of Affairs;
 cash flow statements or monthly income and expense statements;
 standardized data collection form;
 debtor’s books and records, tax returns/assessments, bank records, income information,
and financial statements;
 notes taken during initial consultation(s);
 proofs of claim filed by creditors;
 inventory counts and appraisals of the assets;
 insurance documents;
 debtor’s lawyer, accountants and other professional advisors;
 debtor (or representatives if corporate), etc.; and
 a very healthy dose of common sense and skepticism to assess the relative quality of the
information obtained.
9.3.3. Division I vs. consumer proposal
The amount and level of detail of information needed for a report on a Division I proposal is
significantly greater than for a consumer proposal simply because of the nature and potential
complexity of the engagements. The Division I proposal will be more complex; it may deal
with a corporate debtor or an individual who has significant debts and assets. A consumer
proposal must be an individual debtor with less than $250,000 in debt (excluding mortgage
debt on the principal home).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 141

9.4. Draft the report in proper form and with proper content
9.4.1. Form
BIA Form 48
Directive 24
Directive 24 suggests a format for a Division I proposal report to creditors, unlike the
consumer proposal where the Administrator is required to use Form 48.
9.4.2. Content – Division I proposal
Directive 24
For Division I proposals, the trustee is required to report the following to the meeting of
creditors:
 the findings of the appraisal/investigation of the affairs of the debtor;
 the financial situation of the debtor; and
 the reasons for the financial difficulties.
As well, if the proposal includes a provision stating that sections 95 to 101 of the BIA do not
apply to the proposal, the Trustee must provide an opinion on the reasonableness of a
decision to include such a provision in the proposal, and this opinion must be made available
to the creditors before the meeting.
Unlike the required information under a consumer proposal, it is not a requirement of the
Trustee to provide an opinion on the proposal itself and the debtor’s ability to perform it.
However, it is a good idea to provide a recommendation in an objective and professional
manner in the report. This practice is recommended in Directive 24.
It is also recommended in the Directive to include a projection/estimate of the distribution to
creditors. This projection should compare the proposal with bankruptcy to confirm that the
basic requirement of a proposal is met, i.e., that the dividend distribution is better than
bankruptcy.
A properly written qualification statement should be included with the projection/estimate, so
that it is clear to the users that the information is an educated guess, not fact, nor a warranty
of results. If the proposal is accepted, circumstances could arise such that the debtor
subsequently becomes unable to fulfill the proposal, and if the proposal is rejected, the actual
results of the liquidation process could be different from the estimated amounts, for a variety
of reasons (for example, additional losses incurred in the interim period, adverse changes in
the market for the debtor’s equipment, seasonality, etc.).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 142
The report should be concise and complete, and an executive summary may be provided.
Also, the time and place of the meeting, how to vote, the approval process and result if
rejected can be included in the report.
9.4.3. Content – consumer proposal
BIA Form 48
Form 48 dictates the content of report. It confirms that the Administrator has completed the
work required and that the required documents are attached. The Administrator needs to
identify the causes of insolvency and the reasons for the Administrator’s opinion supporting
(or recommending against) the proposal.
Similar to the Division I proposals, it is good idea to include a projection/estimate of the
distribution to creditors, comparing the proposal to bankruptcy to confirm that the dividend
distribution is better than bankruptcy. A qualification statement should be included with the
projection/estimate.
9.5. Finalizing the report
9.5.1. Deadlines – Division I
BIA s. 50(10)
Directive 24 states that the report should be sent to creditors in advance, preferably with the
notice of the meeting (which must be sent at least 10 days prior to the creditors meeting).
The report may need to be updated for the meeting of creditors (either verbally or in writing) if
additional information becomes available before the meeting.
9.5.2. Deadlines – consumer proposal
BIA s. 66.14(a)
The report must be sent to creditors within 10 days of the filing of the consumer proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 143
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
10. The First Meeting of Creditors

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 144
Table of Contents
10. THE FIRST MEETING OF CREDITORS ... 143
10.1. Introduction ... 146
10.2. Background... 146
10.3. Bankruptcy pre-meeting administration ... 147
10.3.1. Trustee’s appointment ... 147
10.3.2. Notifying the creditors ... 147
10.3.3. Certificate of Appointment... 147
10.3.4. Summary vs. ordinary assignments ... 147
10.3.5. Arranging a location ... 147
10.3.6. Notices to the creditors and bankrupt ... 147
10.3.7. The notice package ... 148
10.3.8. Publication in newspaper ... 148
10.4. Purpose of the meeting ... 148
10.4.1. Purpose ... 148
10.4.2. The affairs of the bankrupt ... 148
10.4.3. The Trustee’s appointment ... 149
10.5. Roles & responsibilities ... 149
10.5.1. Inspectors ... 149
10.5.2. Specific directions ... 149
10.5.3. Chairmanship ... 149
10.5.4. Minutes of the meeting ... 150
10.5.5. A quorum ... 150
10.5.6. Proxies ... 150
10.5.7. Voting ... 150

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 145
10.5.8. Proofs of claims and proxies ... 151
10.6. The meeting ... 151
10.6.1. Procedure at the meeting ... 151
10.6.2. Affirmation of Trustee ... 152
10.6.3. Official Receiver examination ... 152
10.6.4. Trustee’s preliminary report ... 152
10.6.5. Voting procedure ... 153
10.7. Inspectors ... 153
10.7.1. Appointment of inspectors ... 153
10.7.2. If no inspectors are appointed ... 153
10.7.3. Specific directions to the Trustee ... 153
10.8. Closing the meeting and next steps ... 153
10.8.1. Adjournment of the meeting ... 153
10.8.2. Inspectors’ meeting ... 154
10.8.3. Minutes ... 154
10.9. Proposals ... 154
10.9.1. Proposals ... 154
10.9.2. Division I ... 154
10.9.3. Deemed assignment in bankruptcy ... 154
10.9.4. Consumer proposal notice ... 155
10.9.5. Consumer proposal approval and court review ... 155
10.9.6. When meeting is required ... 155
10.9.7. Refusal by the creditors ... 155

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 146
10.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Describe an overview of the first meeting of creditors.
 Explain the purpose of the first meeting of creditors.
 Convene and conduct the first meeting (if a summary administration or a consumer
proposal) and deal with the administration that relates to it.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 2, 14, 36, 102 -120, 121(1), 158, 161, and 198(2)
 BIA Forms 31, 36, 37, 37.1, 41, 66-68 and 73
 BIA Rules 108 - 110
 Directives 4, 22R, 23, 24, 30
10.2. Background
Canadian bankruptcy administration is designed to give creditors as much input and control
as possible. Generally, the creditors first opportunity to participate in the process begins with
the first meeting of creditors should one be required. The creditors discuss the situation with
the Trustee, ask questions if desired and may help make decisions that will set the later
course of the administration. They can even change trustees and get actively involved in
other ways. The first meeting “sets the table” for the administration.
In a proposal, whether it is Division I or Division II (or consumer proposal), the purpose of the
meeting is to take a vote on the proposal.
More than one creditors’ meeting is sometimes held.
Not all bankruptcies or proposals have a meeting of creditors. Summary bankruptcies and
consumer proposals only have a meeting if at least 25% of the proven creditors request it.
Ordinary bankruptcies and Division I proposals always require a meeting to be held within a
specified delay of the filing date.
For a proposal, the meeting needs to be held within 21 days of the filing of the proposal,
unless the court authorizes a longer delay.
For a bankruptcy, the timing of the meeting of creditors itself can be extended by the Official
Receiver by 10 days or, in special cases, 30 days, if the creditors’ interests will not be
jeopardized. The court can authorize more time.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 147
10.3. Bankruptcy pre-meeting administration
10.3.1. Trustee’s appointment
There must be a Trustee in charge of a bankruptcy at all times. A Trustee is appointed by
either the Official Receiver, when an assignment is filed, or by the court, when a Bankruptcy
Order is made. Once the Trustee has accepted his appointment, he must carry out his duties
until he is discharged, removed by court order for cause or replaced by the creditors.
10.3.2. Notifying the creditors
BIA s. 102(1.1)
Pursuant to the BIA, the Trustee is required to give notice of the bankruptcy to all known
creditors within five days from the appointment. A copy of this notice must be e-filed with the
Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy.
10.3.3. Certificate of Appointment
An assignment is by far the most common start to a bankruptcy. The Official Receiver
reviews the assignment, issues an estate number and a Certificate of Appointment to the
Trustee. This is the official document which confirms the date of the bankruptcy, appoints the
Trustee and specifies the date, time, and location of the first meeting of creditors, if any, and
who will be the chairperson.
10.3.4. Summary vs. ordinary assignments
Most assignments are summary administrations, where the certificate does not automatically
call for a meeting. However, the Official Receiver can call a meeting in a summary
administration and must call a meeting in an ordinary administration.
10.3.5. Arranging a location
If the Official Receiver hasn’t set the meeting for his own offices, the Trustee’s first step is to
arrange a suitable location, such as his office or a hotel meeting room or convention center.
The number of creditors who are likely to attend is the key factor in deciding location.
10.3.6. Notices to the creditors and bankrupt
BIA s. 102(1)
BIA Forms 66, 68, 69, 70, 71
Directive 23
Two notices are sent: one to the creditors and one to the bankrupt. They both state the date,
time and location of the meeting. The creditors are also told what they must do to be eligible

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 148
to vote at the meeting. The bankrupt is reminded of his duty and the consequences of not
attending.
10.3.7. The notice package
As well as the notice, the creditors also receive:
 a list of all the creditors who are owed $250 or more, along with the bankrupt’s estimate
of the amount that each is owed;
 a blank proof of claim form; and
 a blank proxy form.
10.3.8. Publication in newspaper
At least five days before the meeting (in an ordinary bankruptcy), the Trustee must publish a
notice in the local newspaper announcing details of the meeting. This is for the benefit of any
other creditors who may have been omitted from the list in the Statement of Affairs. The
notice also explains the bankrupt’s legal status to anyone who may do business with him.
10.4. Purpose of the meeting
10.4.1. Purpose
BIA s. 102(5)
According to the BIA, the purpose of the first meeting is to:
 consider the affairs of the bankrupt;
 affirm the appointment of the Trustee or substitute another;
 decide whether or not to appoint inspectors and, if so, appoint from one to five inspectors;
and
 give specific directions to the Trustee for the ongoing administration.
10.4.2. The affairs of the bankrupt
BIA s. 161
Creditors can question the bankrupt and the Trustee. Others, like the bankrupt’s accountant,
may also be asked for information. The bankrupt may be examined by the Official Receiver.
The responses are reported at the meeting.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 149
10.4.3. The Trustee’s appointment
The initial meeting provides a first opportunity for the creditors to consider the appointment of
the Trustee. It is customary for the person chairing the meeting of creditors to ask for a
motion confirming the Trustee’s appointment, although the creditors could instead, if they
wish, vote on a motion to replace the Trustee. At a first meeting of creditors that follows an
assignment in bankruptcy or a bankruptcy order (i.e., not a bankruptcy that results from a
failed proposal proceeding), the creditors can replace the Trustee through a special
resolution. It requires a majority in number, holding 3/4 of the value of the claims of those
present and voting.
NOTE: The creditors can substitute the Trustee at any meeting of creditors.
10.5. Roles & responsibilities
10.5.1. Inspectors
BIA s. 116
Since the bankruptcy process is intended in large part to optimize recovery for the benefit of
the creditors, the Trustee will often want to consult the creditors on major decisions that could
affect their recovery (e.g., sale of assets). It would be unworkable to have to call a meeting of
creditors every time a decision needs to be made, so the BIA provides that the creditors may
appoint up to five inspectors to advise the Trustee and generally supervise the Trustee’s
work. The creditors could also decide not to appoint inspectors, in which case the Trustee will
have to make decisions without the benefit of the guidance of the inspectors.
Inspectors can be appointed at any meeting of creditors, but they are usually appointed at the
first meeting.
The creditors can always replace the inspectors or override their decisions.
10.5.2. Specific directions
The creditors can give the Trustee specific instructions at any meeting. Sometimes such
directions conflict with what the Trustee thinks should be done, or the instructions may be
impractical, imprudent or counter-productive. In such cases the Trustee should seek direction
from the court.
10.5.3. Chairmanship
BIA s. 105 and 51(3)
The Official Receiver chairs the first meeting of creditors but may, and often does, delegate
this to his nominee who may not necessarily be a Trustee. However, in a Division I or an
Ordinary Administration the nominee can only be a Trustee. All subsequent meetings in a
Division I proposal or an ordinary administration are chaired by the Trustee.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 150
10.5.4. Minutes of the meeting
BIA s. 105(4)
The chairman must keep minutes of who attended and what was discussed and decided at
the meeting. A copy of the minutes must be e-filed with the Office of the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy.
10.5.5. A quorum
BIA s. 106
Directive 22R
A meeting must have a quorum to be able to pass resolutions. A proven creditor present in
person or by proxy constitutes a quorum. If there is no quorum in an ordinary administration,
the Trustee’s appointment is deemed to be affirmed and the meeting is adjourned to a later
date. If there is no quorum in a summary administration the Trustee’s appointment is deemed
to be affirmed and the meeting is adjourned.
10.5.6. Proxies
BIA s. 109(2) – 109(4)
Form 36
A creditor can appoint someone else to be his proxy at the meeting. Anyone except the
bankrupt can be the proxy for a creditor. This is often the Trustee.
10.5.7. Voting

BIA s. 109, 113, 115
All questions at the meeting are decided by a formal vote. Creditors have one vote for each
dollar owed to them. All resolutions (except the substitution of the Trustee) are decided by a
simple majority of the votes: 50% plus one vote.
The chairman decides who can vote. If there is a doubt, the chairman marks the individual’s
vote as objected to and allows the vote, subject to the vote being declared invalid in the event
of the objection being sustained by the court.
Certain creditors’ votes are subject to special rules. The more significant of these rules are
described below:
 A creditor who did not deal with the bankrupt at arm’s length is entitled to vote and the
vote is recorded. If, however, the vote determines the result, the vote is recalculated to

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 151
ignore the creditor’s vote, subject to the right of the court to re-determine the outcome of
the vote later on if the creditor requests it.
 The Trustee, as a creditor or a proxy for a creditor, cannot vote on a motion pertaining to
the Trustee’s conduct or remuneration.
 A close relative of the bankrupt (father, mother, child, sibling, aunt, uncle, spouse or
common-law partner) and, in the case of a corporation, the directors, officers, employees
of the bankrupt corporation or of a subsidiary of the bankrupt corporation, cannot vote on
the appointment of the Trustee and cannot vote on the appointment of inspectors without
court authorization.
 A secured creditor can only vote for the portion of the debt that exceeds the value of the
security. Moreover, the secured creditor cannot vote on the appointment of inspectors
without the permission of the court.
 If a claim was originally held by one creditor but the claim was sold or assigned after the
bankruptcy and in this process the claim was split, the creditor is not be entitled to vote.
10.5.8. Proofs of claims and proxies
BIA s. 109(1) and 121(1)
Directive 22R
To be eligible to vote at any meeting a creditor must have a claim provable in bankruptcy and
have lodged that claim with the Trustee prior to the time appointed for the meeting. Special
attention must be paid to the time a claim is presented to the Trustee.
Proofs of claim are often filed at the last minute, when the creditors arrive at the meeting.
This is not ideal since the Trustee needs time to admit or disallow the claims. The
chairperson must also decide their admissibility to vote. Meetings may be adjourned to
provide time for the Trustee to review claims.
If the claim is filed on time and admitted by the chairperson, a proxy can be filed any time
before an actual vote.
10.6. The meeting
10.6.1. Procedure at the meeting
BIA s. 105(1)
Directive 22
Everyone in attendance is required to sign the attendance sheet, noting who they represent
and the amount of their claim if they are a creditor.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 152
When satisfied a quorum is present, the chairperson calls the meeting to order, reads his
authority to chair the meeting, declares the quorum, introduces the Trustee and other officials
present and lists the documents which are available for creditor review.
These include:
 all proofs of claim and proxies;
 the assignment (or receiving order) and Statement of Affairs;
 the Official Receiver’s notes on the examination of the bankrupt, if one has been held;
 the Trustee’s preliminary report;
 proof of the mailing of the notices; and
 proof of the publication of the notice in the local newspaper.
10.6.2. Affirmation of Trustee
The chairperson outlines the purpose of the meeting of creditors and then explains the
creditors’ rights to affirm or substitute the Trustee. He then asks for a motion to affirm the
appointment of the Trustee. After any discussion, the chairperson calls for a vote. A simple
majority is enough to affirm the appointment, while a special resolution would be required to
replace the Trustee in a bankruptcy administration resulting from a bankruptcy order or an
assignment. If the bankruptcy results from a failed proposal proceeding, the creditors can
replace the Trustee at the first meeting of creditors by ordinary resolution. For a meeting
other than the first meeting of creditors, a special resolution would be required even if the
bankruptcy results from a failed proposal proceeding.
10.6.3. Official Receiver examination
BIA s. 161
The chairperson reads the Official Receiver notes on the examination (or indicates that the
bankrupt may yet be examined).
10.6.4. Trustee’s preliminary report
Directive 30
The Trustee then discusses his preliminary report on the administration. If this report is in
writing, a copy will have been distributed before the meeting started. In a summary
administration this report may be given verbally. The floor is then opened to discussion.
Questions are usually directed to the Trustee, but the bankrupt may be asked questions also.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 153
10.6.5. Voting procedure
All matters at meetings of creditors are decided by a vote. First, a motion is made by an
eligible voter and then seconded by another eligible voter. There can be a discussion,
followed by a vote being taken on the motion. All motions, except one to substitute the
Trustee, are decided by a simple majority of the votes, with creditors being entitled to one
vote for each dollar of their admissible claim.
10.7. Inspectors
10.7.1. Appointment of inspectors
The chairperson explains the role of the inspectors and asks for a motion to appoint a slate of
inspectors; preferably an odd number since this will avoid deadlocks at later inspectors’
meetings.
Most creditors shy away from getting involved as inspectors, so the Trustee and chairperson
must often make an effort to encourage at least one volunteer. Since the biggest creditors
have the most at stake they can often be prevailed upon to volunteer. It is best to arrange this
prior to the meeting.
10.7.2. If no inspectors are appointed
BIA s. 30(3)
In an ordinary administration if the creditors do not appoint at least one inspector, the Trustee
can take the decisions that would require inspector approval under section 30(1) of the BIA
(i.e., decisions to sell the assets, compromise claims, etc.).
In a summary administration, if no inspectors are appointed, the Trustee may do all things
that may ordinarily be done by the Trustee with the permission of the inspectors.
10.7.3. Specific directions to the Trustee
Even if inspectors have been appointed, the creditors may give specific directions to the
Trustee on any matter. Any such directions must be made by formal motion and vote.
10.8. Closing the meeting and next steps
10.8.1. Adjournment of the meeting
If there is no other business, the chairperson declares the meeting adjourned. Any meeting
may be adjourned to a later time, or to another date and time, if certain information needs to
be investigated.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 154
10.8.2. Inspectors’ meeting
The first meeting of inspectors usually immediately follows the first meeting of creditors, since
the inspectors are usually already present.
10.8.3. Minutes
After the meeting, the chairperson must produce minutes of the proceedings. These minutes
will reflect the course of the meeting and must show in detail the motions made and the
results of the votes. Copies of the minutes must be e-filed with the Official Receiver and are
usually made available to any creditor who asks for them.
10.9. Proposals
BIA s. 50.4(6) and 66.14
10.9.1. Proposals
In a proposal the Trustee, or “Administrator” (in a consumer proposal), is appointed by the
proposal itself and the Official Receiver’s certificate simply confirms this. The Trustee of a
Division I proposal must send his notice of the creditors’ meeting to the creditors not less
than 10 days before the meeting.
The Administrator of a Consumer Proposal has 10 days to notify the creditors of the filing of
the consumer proposal, advise them that a meeting of creditors may not be held unless the
creditors ask for it to be held and explain the consequences if there is no requirement to hold
a meeting.
The meeting of creditors is held to consider the proposal and to vote on its acceptance. In a
Division I proposal, the creditors may appoint up to five inspectors at this meeting. In a
Division II proposal, the creditors may appoint up to three inspectors at this meeting. In
addition, other business may be discussed and the meeting may be adjourned to obtain more
information or to investigate the debtor’s situation.
10.9.2. Division I
A Division I proposal requires a meeting be held within 21 days. At the meeting the proposal
will be accepted if a majority of the creditors holding at least 2/3 of the dollars in value are in
favor of it, among the creditors who vote (i.e., an abstention by a creditor does not penalize
or favor the debtor).
10.9.3. Deemed assignment in bankruptcy
If the proposal fails to be accepted by this majority, the debtor will be deemed bankrupt. The
Trustee may then immediately call the first meeting of creditors of the bankruptcy estate or,
depending on the circumstances, the meeting could be adjourned to a later date.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 155
10.9.4. Consumer proposal notice
The notice to creditors of the consumer proposal explains that a meeting of creditors will be
called only if 25% or more in value of the proven claims request a meeting within 45 days
from the date of filing of the proposal.
10.9.5. Consumer proposal approval and court review
If, at the end of 45 days, less than 25% of the votes received request a meeting, the proposal
is deemed accepted and the creditors are given 15 more days to ask for a court review of the
proposal.
10.9.6. When meeting is required
In a consumer proposal process, if the Administrator must call a meeting, it must be held
within 21 days of the 45 day mark. The Official Receiver may chair, but usually delegates to
the Administrator.
10.9.7. Refusal by the creditors
At the meeting, a consumer proposal is decided by a simple majority, with creditors being
entitled to one vote for each dollar of admissible claim.
At the meeting there is no deemed vote. A specific “For” or “Against” is required in writing, but
creditors could abstain (i.e., an abstention by a creditor does not penalize or favor the
debtor).
If the creditors refuse the consumer proposal, there is no deemed bankruptcy. The stay of
proceedings is lifted and the debtor reverts to his previous status.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 156

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 157
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
11. Secure Trustee’s Interest

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 158
Table of Contents
11. SECURE TRUSTEE’S INTEREST ... 157
11.1. Introduction ... 159
11.2. Secure Trustee’s interest in property of the bankruptcy estate ... 159
11.2.1. Reasons for securing Trustee’s interest in property ... 159
11.2.2. Taking possession, seizing and storing property ... 160
11.3. Viewing documentation to determine the extent of the Trustee’s interest ... 164
11.3.1. Documents to review ... 164
11.4. PPSA searches in provinces other than Quebec ... 164
11.4.1. Search Personal Property Security Act (PPSA) ... 164
11.5. Searches in Quebec ... 165
11.5.1. Search Registre des droits personnels et réels mobiliers (RDPRM) ... 165
11.6. Obtain co-operation from joint owners of the bankrupt’s property (if applicable) ... 168
11.7. Securing the Trustee’s interest in property under a proposal ... 169
11.7.1. Non-vesting of assets in a proposal ... 169

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 159
11.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Describe the steps required, upon the Trustee’s appointment, to control and safeguard
the estate assets.
 Review required documents and perform required searches to determine if there are
liabilities associated with the estate assets.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 14.06, 16(3), 18(a), 19(1), 24 (1), 35, 50.4(7), 60(2), 67, 74(1), 84.2, 164
 Directives 7 and 25
 CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 16
11.2. Secure Trustee’s interest in property of the bankruptcy estate
11.2.1. Reasons for securing Trustee’s interest in property
Immediately upon appointment, the Trustee secures his interest in the assets/property of the
bankrupt. This is done because it is the duty of the Trustee to ensure that the assets/property
of the estate are not sold, transferred, damaged, stolen or dissipated before they can be
realized upon by the Trustee for the benefit of creditors in general. It also ensures that the
assets/property do not cause harm or incur a potential liability for the estate, e.g., create
environmental concerns.
Securing the property of the bankrupt estate may take several forms depending on the type
of property and the Trustee’s interest. The securing may be done by:
 taking possession and storing property such as inventory or other movable or personal
property;
 in certain more difficult cases, obtaining a court order to seize property, relocate it, or
compel a third party to deliver it to the Trustee;
 issuing letters to people who owe money to the bankrupt advising them of the
appointment and of the need to pay the Trustee;
 notifying a custodian of property of the Trustee’s interest so that the custodian does not
release the property to any third party without the Trustee’s consent;
 obtaining insurance;
 registering on title;
 reviewing the interests of any other party in the same asset; and/or

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 160
 reviewing for and reporting on environmental exposure, if any exists.
In all cases, the Trustee is to comply with the BIA, Directives of the OSB and CAIRP Rules of
Professional Conduct and to act in a commercially reasonable manner. The Trustee must
take the necessary steps to ensure that the interests of the estate and the general body of
creditors are protected until the property is either sold or released.
11.2.2. Taking possession, seizing and storing property
Corporate Bankruptcies
BIA s. 16(3)
Directive 7
Immediately after being appointed, the Trustee is required to take possession of the property
and records of the bankrupt and make an inventory thereof. He is entitled to examine
property of the bankrupt even if it is in the possession of a secured creditor and no person is
entitled to withhold books of account of the bankrupt from the Trustee.
In many corporate bankruptcies, the property of the bankrupt may be situated in premises
leased by the bankrupt. The Trustee has the right to take possession of the property at the
leased premises and can occupy the leased premises for a period of time. The rights of the
landlord are governed by the BIA and by the laws of the province in which the leased
premises are situated. Be aware that the Trustee cannot enter premises occupied by a
person other than the bankrupt (even if the bankrupt’s property is located therein) without that
person’s consent or a warrant issued by the court.
In a corporate bankruptcy, there are many steps that should be taken to ensure that the
property is secured. They may include the following:
 perform the inventory count in accordance with the standards set out in Directive 7;
 move inventory to a new storage facility if desired;
 change the locks on all buildings, cancel all access pass cards and control the reissue of
cards to authorized personnel;
 inform the external security company, if any, of the Trustee’s appointment and contact
information;
 change all computer passwords;
 arrange for a back-up of the corporate records to be performed and stored at the
Trustee’s office;
 count any petty cash on-hand and deposit into a new estate bank account, together with
any cheques;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 161
 contact the bankrupt’s bank to make arrangements to close old bank accounts in order to
stop cheques from being processed on the account and arrange to have the positive
balance of account (if not in overdraft) transferred to the estate account;
 review the location of any third-party storage facilities with the bankrupt. When this is
done, notify the storage facility of the Trustee’s appointment and perform the same
actions as above. Be aware of any outstanding payments to the storage facility as there
may be a lien or right of retention against the assets at that site; and
 redirect mail to the Trustee’s offices to ensure continued accounts receivable collection.
The Trustee can issue a notice requesting Canada Post to redirect the bankrupt's mail to
the Trustee. The Trustee should only open mail addressed to the bankrupt corporation.
Personal bankruptcies
In personal bankruptcies assets may be exempt under various legislation (discussed further
in Module 12). Under the BIA, the exempt assets are not property that is available for
distribution to the creditors in general, and therefore no action to secure the exempt property
would be required by the Trustee. However, it is incumbent upon the bankrupt to fully
disclose to the Trustee all assets. The Trustee will then be able to report to the court and
creditors the status of every piece of property the bankrupt owned at the time of his
bankruptcy, exempt or otherwise.
There may be times where the personal bankrupt has property that is not exempt.
Note however that some of these assets, or portions of these assets, could be exempt. For
example, with respect to RRSPs, contributions made within 12 months prior to the date of
bankruptcy may vest with the Trustee, while the funds invested more than 12 months prior to
the bankruptcy are exempt. Registered pension plans are locked in and protected under
legislation such as the Pension Benefits Act. Some insurance contracts may be exempt
property as well. It is therefore important to investigate the assets to find out whether they
constitute exempt assets or vest in the Trustee, and to what extent.
The Trustee will immediately provide the financial institution or insurance companies
administering investments, RESP’s, pensions, etc. with a copy of his appointment and
request that the balances in the various accounts be cashed in and forwarded to the Trustee.
This will put the financial institution on notice that the bankrupt no longer has any authority
over the accounts as the accounts vest with the Trustee unless exempt under the BIA, or
provincial legislation (such as the Pension Benefits Act or the Insurance Act).
Performing the inventory count
Directive 7
Proper documentation of estate assets is critical to ensure that the Trustee can:
 properly account for the disposition of all estate assets;
 refer to detailed records if any third party claims are received; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 162
 provide the above noted information to the inspectors or OSB for review when requested.
The Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy has published a directive that details the
standards to which all trustees, interim receivers (if required per court order) and trustees
under a proposal (if holding assets to be distributed under the proposal) must comply.
These standards are outlined below:
 The inventory must be divided into three parts:
1. all items which vest in the Trustee;
2. all items which belong to a third party; and
3. all items, where, in the opinion of the Trustee, ownership is in dispute. This may
include, but is not limited to, 30-day goods, BIA section 81.1 claims, leased goods
and goods held on a consignment basis.
 The inventory must include:
 an accounting of all the articles of property in the possession of the debtor with
sufficient information to identify each item;
 a valuation of each item with a note explaining the means used to establish the value.
Where such a valuation is not included by the person making the inventory, the
Trustee is responsible for ensuring that the valuation is completed immediately and
added to the inventory after receiving the incomplete inventory;
 the name(s) of the person(s) who conducted the inventory count and the Trustee
responsible for the inventory;
 the date and time when the inventory was prepared;
 the location(s) of the assets;
 the details of damaged, deteriorated or perishable goods; and
 a description of control procedure(s) employed to ensure that all assets are
accounted for.
 The person preparing the inventory must initial or sign each inventory sheet. The same
person must also complete and attach the form in Appendix I of this Directive.
 The debtor, or an officer of the debtor corporation, must be given a copy of the inventory
sheets and must complete the written statement in Appendix II of this Directive. The
completed statement must be attached to the inventory list. In the absence of such a
statement, the Trustee must sign and attach a document providing reasons for its
absence.
 Where the Trustee is relying on an inventory prepared by a third party, the Trustee must
personally ensure that this Directive has been adhered to and must sign Appendix I of the
Directive.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 163
Handling perishable property
BIA s. 18 and 19(1)
The Trustee may dispose of property that is perishable or likely to depreciate rapidly in value.
“Perishable” is usually understood to mean that it will physically spoil quickly, not that it is
seasonal. The provision that allows the Trustee to take steps to realize property in case of
urgency is not limited to perishable property, but also to property that is likely to depreciate
rapidly in value. This will depend on the circumstances, but is usually understood to mean
more than a mere seasonal fluctuation, and is intended to prevent a sharp loss in value
because of a delay, a loss of value that is more than just incidental.
The Trustee may dispose of perishable property by continuing to carry on the business of the
bankrupt, or he may dispose of the perishable property by another method.
If the Trustee is unsure how to proceed on the assets, authority is given to the Trustee to
obtain legal advice prior to the first meeting of creditors and to institute legal proceedings for
the recovery or protection of the assets, if necessary.
Obtaining insurance
BIA s. 24(1)
The Trustee must insure all insurable property of the bankrupt until inspectors are appointed
and take all necessary actions to secure and protect the assets. Once the inspectors are
appointed, they may determine the amount for which, and the hazards against which, the
assets will be insured.
The insurer should be contacted shortly after your appointment to have the insurance policy
changed to reflect the estate Trustee as the named insured and loss payee. A copy of the
policy should be obtained and reviewed to determine if the level of insurance placed by the
bankrupt meets the Trustee’s required level of insurance; additional insurance may have to
be purchased to protect the assets.
Registering on title
BIA s. 74(1)
If the bankrupt has an interest in a physical piece of real estate, the Trustee should consider
registering his interest in the real estate on title. Registering on title will ensure that the
Trustee is notified if there is any attempt to sell the property. The registration process may
differ from province to province.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 164
11.3. Viewing documentation to determine the extent of the Trustee’s
interest
11.3.1. Documents to review
The bankrupt’s records must be reviewed to determine if the assets on the inventory listing
are fully paid, or if there are outstanding liabilities that may (or may not) take priority over the
Trustee’s interest. The records may indicate if the inventory is held by the bankrupt for a third
party (consignment) and will assist the review for third party property claims and 30-day
goods claims. Common documentation to review includes leases, loan agreements,
purchase and sale agreements, mortgages, PPSA registrations [in Quebec, the register
known through its English acronym RPMRR, or the French acronym RDPRM6], etc.
If the lessor, seller or lender has properly documented, published, registered and perfected
its security agreement against an asset, that security agreement, and any amount
outstanding on the loan, will take priority to the Trustee’s interest in the asset.
11.4. PPSA searches in provinces other than Quebec
11.4.1. Search Personal Property Security Act (PPSA)
It is critical to determine whether security interests are properly perfected. Perfection is
usually completed by registration. Improper registrations can result in the assets coming to
the estate for distribution among the unsecured creditors as the Trustee’s interest takes
priority over the secured lender if the security has been improperly registered.
One method to determine whether a security interest is perfected through registration is
through a search of the provincial data base. Most provinces have a PPSA, a provincial
legislation intended to manage the rules pertaining to security interests in personal property.
The legislation provides for a database or registry to manage the information relating to the
legislation, thus creating a system whereby lenders can register their security interests in
various assets and other lenders and trustees can search the PPSA registry to discover other
security registrations that may exist on the same asset. The registry is often colloquially
referred to as the “PPSA”, as in “search the PPSA”, although in fact “PPSA” refers to the
legislation itself, the Personal Property Security Act.
A security interest is registered by way of a financing statement. For every bankruptcy, a
PPSA search should be performed. This search should reveal most of the security interests
registered against the debtor/bankrupt.
A PPSA search may not uncover all of the valid security interests, as it is possible that a
security interest may be perfected by possession of the collateral, but then the asset itself

6 RPMRR for Register of personal and movable real rights, and RDPRM for Registre des droits personnels et réels mobiliers.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 165
would have to be in the hands of a third party. You should be able to find out about the third
party’s rights when contacting the third party that has the asset in its possession.
For the rights that are registered, there are two types of searches: Certified and Uncertified.
The Certified search is more expensive but guarantees the accuracy of the information
contained in it. If an error is made, a claim may be made against the PPSA registration
system that has a fund for paying such claims. However, most Trustee practices rely on the
Uncertified search.
The information contained in an Uncertified "Individual Debtor" response should show the
debtor name (including middle initials), date of birth, sex, address, and the name of the
secured party, the collateral (specific property/asset) secured and a general description of the
collateral. When you review the search if you note that certain items are missing you should
point out the omission to the Trustee(s) as this information may be critical to the validity of the
registration, which would mean that the registration may be invalid. The Trustee will make the
determination as to whether or not to disallow the security or to get a formal legal opinion on
the validity of the secured creditor's registration.
You should note that the collateral which can be registered under the PPSA, is just as the
words of the statute suggest, personal property, i.e., not real property (land).
11.5. Searches in Quebec
11.5.1. Search Registre des droits personnels et réels mobiliers (RDPRM)
As in the rest of Canada, the way to ensure that rights have duly been registered is to
proceed with a search in the different provincial registers. In most provinces, there is a
Personal Property Security Act (PPSA)/Loi sur les sûretés mobilières that provides for such a
register. In Quebec, the Civil Code provides for a register named the Register of Personal
and Movable Real Rights (RPMRR or RDPRM), in which the rights over movable or personal
property may be published.
In the RDPRM lenders can publish their rights on certain property and other lenders or
trustees can find out if security interests are published on this property.
A right over personal property is inscribed or registered in the RDPRM via a publication
requisition which can be found on line on the RDPRM site. For each bankruptcy case, you
must make a search in the RDPRM which should reveal all the security interests published
against a debtor/bankrupt.
This search can be done “on line” directly from the RDPRM site. You can consult the RDPRM
yourself directly and print the result of your search, or you can request a certified registration
statement. This certified statement costs more but it guarantees the accurateness of the
information contained therein. However, for most bankruptcy cases, the Trustee can rely on
his online consultation of the register.
In order to proceed with a search, you need the following information:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 166

For a natural person
It is necessary to have the name, usual given name and date of birth. Please note that a
second initial is seldom used in Quebec so that a search may be conducted without that item.
More diligence is needed however in the case of a married woman. Since April 2, 1981, any
search related to a married woman should be carried out only on her birth name. Before April
2, 1981, women may have borne different names and consequently been registered under
any one of them; i.e., (a) birth name; (b) husband’s name; (c) birth name followed by
husband’s name or (d) husband’s name followed by birth name. As a result, it would be more
prudent to conduct a search under these four possible names.
For an individual debtor, the address is not necessary in order to initiate a search. However,
it becomes important to clearly identify the debtor.
When a search application is made, either for an individual debtor or a corporation, the
register will show a result for the name submitted and any similar names.
Since registrations are entered according to the requisitions as presented, if an applicant
made an error, for instance when entering the date of birth or other information, it becomes
necessary to verify the list of similar names to be sure of obtaining a complete search of all
the registrations related to that name.
With regard to a search for an individual debtor, it is important to note the following articles of
the Quebec Civil Code:
“2683. Where the act constituting the hypothec is accessory to a consumer contract, it is
subject to the rules on form and content prescribed by this Book or by regulation.
2684. Only a person or a Trustee carrying on an enterprise may grant a hypothec on a
universality of property, movable or immovable, present or future, corporeal or
incorporeal.
The person or Trustee may thus hypothecate animals, tools or equipment
pertaining to the enterprise, claims and accounts receivable, patents and
trademarks, or corporeal movables included in the assets of any of his enterprises
kept for sale, lease or processing in the manufacture or transformation of property
intended for sale, for lease or for use in providing a service.
2685. Only a person or a Trustee carrying on an enterprise may grant a hypothec on a
movable represented by a bill of lading.
2686. Only a person or a Trustee carrying on an enterprise may grant a floating
hypothec on the property of the enterprise.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 167
Regulation on the register of personal and movable real rights7:
15.01 In addition to where they pertain to property acquired or required for the service or
operation of an enterprise, reservations of ownership, rights of redemption and
rights under a lease of more than one year, as well as any transfer of those
reservations or rights, require publication in the register in accordance with articles
1745, 1750 and 1852 of the Civil Code where they pertain to the following
property:
 a road vehicle included in one of the classes referred to in subparagraphs
1, 2, 9, 10 and 11 of the first paragraph of section 158;
 a caravan or a fifth-wheel;
 a mobile home;
 a boat;
 a personal watercraft;
 an aircraft.
15.02 The property on which a natural person who does not operate an enterprise may
grant a movable hypothec without delivery pursuant to article 2683 of the Civil
Code is:
a) the property listed in section 15.01,
b) precious property within the meaning of the Taxation Act (Chapters I-3);
c) incorporeal property, particularly property that constitutes a form of investment
within the meaning of the Securities Act (chapter V-1.1), securities and
security entitlements referred to in the Act respecting the transfer of securities
and the establishment of security entitlements (chapter T-11.002), derivatives
referred to in the Derivatives Act (chapter I-14.01), claims, rights arising from
an insurance contract and intellectual property rights, excluding in all cases
property constituting a registered retirement savings plan, a registered
retirement income fund, a registered education savings plan or a registered
disability savings plan within the meaning of the Taxation Act.
For the purposes of the first paragraph,

7 Except where he operates an enterprise and the hypothec is charged on the property of that enterprise, a natural person may
grant a movable hypothec without delivery only on road vehicles and other movable property determined by regulation and
subject to the conditions determined by regulation
8 Classes listed in subparagraph 1, 2, 9, 10 and 11 of section 15: 1: a passenger vehicle; 2: a motorcycle; 9: a motor home; 10: a
snowmobile of a model year more recent than 1988; and 11: a motorized all-terrain vehicle equipped with handlebars and at
least 2 wheels, that is designed to be straddled and whose net weight does not exceed 600 kilograms.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 168
1: the road vehicles listed in subparagraphs 1 to 7 are those defined in section 4
of the Highway Safety code; and
2: the road vehicles listed in subparagraphs 8 to 10 are those defined in section 2
of the Regulation respecting road vehicle registration (chapter C-24.2, r. 29).
A descriptive file shall be opened for a road vehicle included in one of the classes
referred to in subparagraphs 1 and 3 to 9 of the first paragraph only where the
vehicle’s identification number has 17 characters and has been validated by the
Registrar using the control algorithm.”
For a corporation
It is necessary to have the exact name of the company; for this purpose, it is always more
prudent to have on hand a Return of Information issued by the Inspector General of Financial
Institutions pertaining to the company under search.
When a natural person acts for a company he operates, or when a corporation acts under a
name other than its own (i.e., a numbered company) and its designation in the requisition
also comprises the name of the company or the other name, it is important to conduct a
search for each of the names and carefully check the list of similar names. At this stage, it is
useful to know the postal code for this corporation’s address in order to confirm that the
information sought after truly relates to that corporation.
Frequently, in the list of names showing similarities, registrations have been made under a
name combining both English and French versions of the corporation (e.g., XYZ & Company
Ltd./XYZ & Compagnie Limitée), so it is very important to carefully check the list of similar
names.
For a road vehicle
It is possible to search for rights published against a particular road vehicle. To access this
information, you only need to know the vehicle identification number (serial number) given to
the vehicle under the Highway Safety Code. This number has 17 characters; caution should
be used in order not to mistake the letter “O” for the number “0”, or the small letter “l” or “I”
(capital i) for the number “1”.
11.6. Obtain co-operation from joint owners of the bankrupt’s property (if
applicable)
There may be cases where the bankrupt has an ownership interest in an asset, e.g., by
owning 50% of a company, 25% of a cottage or 75% of a boat. Any partial interest in an
asset still vests with the Trustee.
The Trustee should be informed of any assets for which the bankrupt does not own 100%, as
the Trustee will need to form a strategy for the safekeeping and eventual realization of this
asset. The Trustee will need to satisfy himself as to whether the joint asset is properly
secured and insured by the joint owner. In some cases, such as assets which are mobile

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 169
(e.g., cars, boats etc.), the Trustee may need to seek the co-operation of the joint owner to
have the asset moved to a secure facility for protection.
The Trustee will usually approach the co-owner of the asset to determine if the co-owner
would consider purchasing the Trustee’s interest in the asset, as this is usually the solution
that presents the least amount of complications and execution risks. If so, the Trustee must
ensure that the purchase price represents a fair value and that the inspectors approve the
sale. If not, the Trustee will review copies of the purchase documentation, as provisions for
the asset’s sale may be provided therein. In difficult circumstances, the Trustee may need to
go to court to obtain a sale order. Any sale of an asset to a related party must be approved
by the court.
11.7. Securing the Trustee’s interest in property under a proposal
11.7.1. Non-vesting of assets in a proposal
BIA s. 50.4(7)
When a debtor files a proposal (Division I or consumer), or a Notice of Intention to File a
Proposal, the debtor usually remains in control of his assets. Usually, the Trustee does not
take possession of the debtor’s assets, save for exceptional circumstances (for example, if
the Trustee is appointed as interim receiver or, if for some reason, the proposal contemplates
that the Trustee will have the possession of the assets).
The Trustee is required to monitor the debtor’s business and financial affairs and report to the
creditors and the Official Receiver thereon and to report any material adverse change in the
debtor’s affairs. A “material adverse change” is necessarily a change that is significant, that is
not trivial, and that would cause a person to change a decision or behavior in a meaningful
way.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 170
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
12. Value Assets: Research Methods of Sale

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 171
Table of Contents
12. VALUE ASSETS: RESEARCH METHODS OF SALE ... 170
12.1. Introduction ... 173
12.2. Bankrupt’s Property ... 173
12.2.1. Definitions per BIA s. 2 and 67 ... 173
12.3. What is not property of the bankrupt? ... 174
12.3.1. Overview ... 174
12.3.2. Definition per the BIA s. 67(1) ... 174
12.3.3. Exempt assets – Provincial Execution Acts ... 175
12.3.4. Assets held in trust ... 176
12.3.5. Deemed trusts ... 176
12.3.6. Statutory trusts and liens ... 177
12.3.7. Property held by the bankrupt for a third party ... 177
12.3.8. Recently delivered merchandise (30 day goods claims) ... 178
12.3.9. Rights of farmers, fishermen, aquaculturists ... 179
12.3.10. GST tax credit payments ... 179
12.4. After-acquired property ... 180
12.4.1. Definition ... 180
12.4.2. When the Trustee refuses or neglects to act ... 180
12.5. Surplus income ... 181
12.5.1. Trustee’s actions ... 181
12.6. Asset value assessment ... 182
12.6.1. Why value assets? ... 182
12.6.2. Valuation assumptions ... 182
12.6.3. Perform cost/benefit analysis for each type of valuation ... 183

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 172
12.7. Mode of realizations ... 183
12.7.1. Sales methods ... 183
12.7.2. Private sale ... 184
12.7.3. Tender ... 184
12.7.4. Auction ... 186
12.7.5. Retail ... 187
12.7.6. Going concern / bulk sale of enterprise ... 187
12.8. Notice requirements ... 187
12.8.1. General... 187
12.9. Approvals required ... 188
12.9.1. Inspector / court / secured creditor ... 188
12.9.2. Confidentiality agreement ... 188
12.9.3. Purchase and sale agreement ... 189
12.9.4. Auction agreement and other service agreements ... 189

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 173
12.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Identify the assets of the bankrupt.
 Report to the Trustee on assets that may belong to, or be encumbered by, third parties.
 Report to the Trustee the results of your review of the bankrupt’s claim regarding assets
that are exempt from the bankruptcy process.
 Prepare a report for the Trustee as to the estimated net value of the estate assets and
prepare a recommendation of the sales process(es) that will best obtain this value.
 Prepare a report for the appropriate party seeking approval for the sales processes.
 Monitor the bankrupt’s financial status to determine if the bankrupt is in receipt of assets
prior to his discharge that should form part of the estate.
 Calculate the amount of income the bankrupt should remit to the estate from his wages,
salary and other remuneration during his bankruptcy period.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 2, 16(3), 30, 38, 40(1), 67, 68, 71(2), 81, 99 and 158
 BIA Form 75
 BIA Rule 59
 Directives 11R and 16R
 CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice Nos. 4, 14, 17 and 18
 Ontario Execution Act, s.2, OR similar Act applicable to student's home province
 In Quebec, sections 552 and 553 of the Code of Civil Procedure (or sections 694, 695
and 696 of the new Code of Civil Procedure enacted on February 21st, 2014 and in force
in 2016)
12.2. Bankrupt’s Property
12.2.1. Definitions per BIA s. 2 and 67
BIA s. 2, 67 and 71
Upon filing an assignment in bankruptcy, all property of the bankrupt vests in the Trustee and
the bankrupt ceases to have any capacity to deal with his property. The Trustee “stands in
the shoes” of the bankrupt.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 174
Property is defined in extremely broad terms and includes property of every description: real
or personal, moveable or immovable, tangible or intangible, legal or equitable, in Canada and
elsewhere, and includes interests, whether present or future, vested or contingent.
All property owned by the bankrupt on the date of bankruptcy and all property he may acquire
after his bankruptcy but prior to discharge, form part of the estate.
This definition sounds clear; everything the bankrupt owns or will own before he is
discharged, anywhere in the world, vests in the Trustee for the benefit of creditors, but is it
not that simple:
 the BIA and certain federal and provincial legislation exempt certain property from the
definition of property in Section 67 of the BIA; and
 the “future” property does not vest automatically in the Trustee, but rather the Trustee
must take steps to obtain this property. The bankrupt can deal with this property in the
normal course until the Trustee intervenes (see section 99 BIA).
The reason why some property does not form part of the estate, or does not automatically
form part of the estate, is to meet the rehabilitation objective of the BIA. The BIA is not meant
to be overly punitive, and aims (among other things) to allow an honest but unfortunate
debtor an opportunity to get rid of an unmanageable debt burden subject to reasonable
conditions. In order to allow a possibility for the debtor to become rehabilitated and to allow
him to fulfil his family obligations, the bankruptcy process cannot leave him destitute. As
such, the bankruptcy process is designed to leave the bankrupt with some assets and some
control over future assets to allow him to have a reasonable standard of life, i.e., beyond
being destitute or merely subsisting.
The sections that follow explain how the bankruptcy process allows the bankrupt to retain
control over certain assets described as “exempt”.
12.3. What is not property of the bankrupt?
12.3.1. Overview
The BIA has defined property that does not form part of the bankrupt's estate, i.e., that is
exempt. This exempted property includes certain specific assets as defined in the BIA and
property that is exempt from seizure or execution proceedings under federal and provincial
statutes. These exemptions, defined under federal or provincial law, relate, in effect, to where
the property is located and where the bankrupt resides.
12.3.2. Definition per the BIA s. 67(1)
BIA s. 67(1)
"The property of a bankrupt divisible among his creditors shall not comprise:
(a) property held by the bankrupt in trust for any other person;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 175
(b) any property that as against the bankrupt is exempt from execution or seizure under
any laws applicable in the province within which the property is situated and within
which the bankrupt resides";
(b.1) goods and services tax-credit payments that are made in prescribed circumstances to
the bankrupt and are not property referred to in paragraph (a) or (b)”
(b.2) prescribed payments relating to the essential needs of an individual that are made in
prescribed circumstances to the bankrupt that are not property referred to in (a) or (b);
or
(b.3) property in a registered retirement savings plan or registered retirement income fund,
other than that which was contributed to the plan or fund in the twelve months before
the date of bankruptcy.
but shall comprise (…) (the remainder of the section is intentionally omitted as it deals with
an interpretation of what is included in the property, not what is exempt).
12.3.3. Exempt assets – Provincial Execution Acts
BIA s. 67(1)
BIA Rule 59.1 and 59.2
Ontario Execution Act s. 2 OR similar Act applicable to your home province. In Quebec, the Code of
Civil Procedure
Each province has a provincial statute that outlines the chattels exempt from seizure by a
Trustee or any creditor. In Ontario, for example, it is the Execution Act that determines
certain assets that are exempt from seizure. In Quebec, it is the Code of Civil Procedure that
deals with exemptions from seizure. These exemptions do not exist for corporate debtors.
As each provincial execution act differs, you should be familiar with the statutes applicable in
your province.
Most pensions and annuities are exempt from seizure along with "cash surrender value" for
specific types of insurance policies, depending on the beneficiary.
The BIA and the (Bankruptcy and Insolvency) General Rules provide that RRSPs and DPSPs
(deferred profit sharing plans) are exempt, subject to a claw back for contributions made in
the twelve months preceding the bankruptcy. This means that, under the exemption provided
for in the BIA itself, a portion of the RRSP or DPSP would be exempt, and a portion would
not be exempt. However, the exemption provided for in the BIA does not supersede the
general exemption for assets that are exempt under provincial laws applicable in the province
where the assets are located and where the bankrupt resides. As a consequence, where
provincial legislation exempts RRSPs from execution, the provincial legislation will apply.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 176
You should recognize that the bankrupt makes the claim for exempt property and in certain
circumstances it may be appropriate to obtain an affidavit from the bankrupt in support of a
claim for exempt property (see Module 2).
12.3.4. Assets held in trust
BIA s. 67(1)(a)
Assets held in trust by a bankrupt do not form part of the estate. Some bankrupts may have
assets which they claim are ‘held in trust’ for a third party. In order for these assets to be
exempt, the bankrupt must provide a copy of the formal trust documents setting out the
creation of the trust and the named beneficiary. In Common Law provinces and in Quebec,
there are specific conditions that must be met before a valid trust is created, and the failure to
meet one or more of these conditions could render the trust invalid and make the property
that was thought to be “in trust” available for distribution. The Trustee will review these
documents and, if appropriate, determine the assets to be exempt. Unless such documents
are provided the bankrupt’s claim for exemption will not be allowed.
Trusts created by statute will serve to remove trust funds from the bankruptcy administration.
Claimants against trust funds are not treated as creditors because the property held by the
bankrupt in trust for another person is excluded from property divisible amongst his creditors.
12.3.5. Deemed trusts
BIA s. 67
There are legislative provisions that aim to protect certain creditors by creating, through the
law, a type of trust, referred to as a “deemed trust”, in favour of a third party. The provision is
referred to as a “deemed trust” because, typically, the legislative provision creates a trust of
sorts by presuming, or deeming, that something has occurred or exists even though it did not.
This “deeming” replaces some of the requirements to create a trust, in particular without a
need for any agreement or formal documentation establishing the trust.
The “deemed trust” is not a real trust but is a statutorily created mechanism to protect a third
party. Typically, a “deemed trust” will be provided in a law to protect the amounts due to the
government, for payroll source deductions, sales, goods and services taxes or harmonized
sales taxes, to protect amounts due to employees for vacation pay (in Ontario), or to protect
amounts due to pension plans for employer or employee contributions not remitted to the
plan. The deemed trust provision in the law typically aims at “deeming” some property of the
debtor to be held separate and apart, i.e., in trust, and to be owned beneficially by the
creditor sought to be protected (typically, the government, employees or pension plans).
For example: ABC Co. collected GST/HST/PST from its customers in the amount of $5,000
in the month of May. In addition, it paid its employees and withheld $7,000 in taxes/EI/CPP in
the month of May. Neither of these amounts was remitted to the respective governments.
The total deemed trust liability to the government is $12,000.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 177
The governmental agencies, or the beneficiaries of the deemed trust, will make a claim for
the deemed trust amounts. It depends, however, upon the type of appointment as to whether
the deemed trust amounts are paid in full or become part of the unsecured creditor claims
and share pro-rata in the overall dividend.
In a receivership, all proceeds realized by the receiver will first be to the benefit of the
deemed trusts until the liability has been fully extinguished. If the receiver realized $20,000
from the company’s assets, $12,000 would be paid to the deemed trusts and the remaining
$8,000 would be remitted to the secured creditor.
In a bankruptcy, substantially all of the deemed trust provisions of any law where the
beneficiary of the deemed trust is the government are considered invalid. The more notable
exception is the deemed trust for employee source deductions, for both the federal
deductions at source (income taxes, EI and CPP premiums), and the Quebec deductions at
source (income taxes and Quebec Pension Plan). As such, the deemed trust for
GST/HST/PST does not apply and the claim by the government agencies will be an
unsecured claim and will receive a pro-rata dividend of the estate realizations. The deemed
trust portion of source deductions, however, is considered a “property” claim and has first
charge on any assets.
12.3.6. Statutory trusts and liens
There are other types of legislation that encumber the property, such as the Construction
Lien Acts, and the Storage and Repairman’s Lien Act. These Acts state that certain creditors
can make a claim on the bankrupt’s property for payment of arrears. If you become aware of
any claim of this nature, the Trustee should be informed immediately. The Trustee will be
unable to complete any sale of the property until these claims are resolved.
In Quebec, there is the legal hypothec in favor of persons having taken part in the
construction or renovation of an immovable (sections 2726 to 2728 C.C.Q) and the right to
retain movable property (section 2651 C.C.Q).
12.3.7. Property held by the bankrupt for a third party
BIA s. 81(1)
There are times when a person claims the bankrupt or the Trustee is in possession of
property belonging to him, such as property loaned to the bankrupt. The third party must, if
the Trustee will not readily acknowledge the ownership right and return the property, file a
proof of claim. The claim form to be filed is not a "proof of claim" in the ordinary bankruptcy
sense, as is required to be filed by unsecured creditors. Rather, it is a “proof of claim of
property”, or claim for possession of the property which is being held by the Trustee. The
onus is on the claimant to prove his entitlement to the property, and the claim must be made
through a sworn or solemn declaration (contrary to the “ordinary” proof of claim that only
needs to be witnessed, not sworn).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 178
The Trustee must respond to the claimant either within 15 days of the claim’s receipt or within
15 days after the first meeting of creditors, whichever is later. The Trustee must either admit
the claim and surrender the property to the claimant or reject the claim and give reasons. If
the claim is rejected, the claimant has 15 days to lodge an appeal. Should he neglect to do
so, he will be deemed to have relinquished any interest in the property to the Trustee. The
Trustee can then sell the property without regard to this claim.
For example, a debtor may run a business and have a coffee machine that was loaned by the
coffee supplier to facilitate the sale of its coffee. The coffee machine would not be considered
property of the bankrupt. However, due to uncertainty or incomplete records of the bankrupt,
the Trustee may be unsure whether the coffee machine used every day in the business
belongs to the bankrupt or the coffee supplier. In such a case, it would be prudent for the
Trustee to ask that the coffee supplier submit a proof of claim of property. The coffee supplier
would have to prove his ownership of the coffee machine before it is released to him.
12.3.8. Recently delivered merchandise (30 day goods claims)
BIA s. 81.1
BIA Form 75
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 18
Under certain conditions unpaid suppliers can recover their goods that were recently
delivered (colloquially referred to as “30 day goods”). The relevant sections of the BIA are
very specific and the procedures which must be followed for recovering goods require rapid
and properly documented notification of the Trustee and/or receiver. Note that BIA sections
81.1 and 81.2 do not take effect unless there is a bankruptcy or when a receiver has been
appointed.
To make a claim, an unpaid supplier has to demand possession of goods delivered within the
30 days prior to a bankruptcy or receivership, in writing. The supplier will have 15 days from
the date of the bankruptcy, or the date the receiver is appointed, to demand possession.
However, in order for the claim to be accepted, the following conditions must be met:
 the goods must be identifiable and not yet been fully paid for;
 they must be in the same state as they were on delivery;
 they cannot have been resold at arm's length, or be subject to agreement for sale at
arm's length; and
 the Trustee/receiver must be in possession of the goods at the time the demand is
received.
The last two points are very important. The Trustee/receiver has the power to continue to
carry on the debtor’s business. If, by the time a 30-day claim is received, the goods have
already been sold then the claim is invalid and the proceeds of the sale are retained by the
Trustee/receiver.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 179
If the goods have been partially paid for, then the repossession is allowed only for the portion
of the goods in proportion to the unpaid amount. Alternatively, if the supplier returns the
partial payment to the purchaser, Trustee or receiver, the supplier can then recover all of the
goods. The Trustee also has the option of remitting the unpaid balance owing and keeping
the goods.
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 18 sets out the Trustee/receiver's
responsibilities in respect of written documents for 30-days goods claims by unpaid suppliers.
12.3.9. Rights of farmers, fishermen, aquaculturists
BIA s. 81.2
In addition to the right to recover the recently delivered property (as described in the section
above), suppliers who are farmers, fishermen or aquaculturalists have an additional
protection in the form of a superpriority over inventory, under BIA s. 81.2. This right applies in
addition to, and not in replacement of, the right discussed above. The farmer, fisherman or
aquaculturist can make a claim under both of the sections, and chose the one that is most
advantageous. However, in practice, the right to recover property (as described in the section
above) is not very useful for farmers, fishermen and aquaculturists, because of the nature of
the product (it tends to be consumed or spoil very quickly, so the product is usually not in the
possession of the bankrupt, Trustee or receiver by the time a claim is made, or if it is, it is
usually not identifiable). For the alternative right, namely a right to a superpriority over
inventory, the suppliers who are farmers, fishermen or aquaculturalists must make a claim
within 30 days from the date of bankruptcy/receivership and must have supplied goods to the
debtor within the fifteen-day period preceding the day of bankruptcy or receivership. Every
valid claim is secured by a charge on all the inventory and ranks above every other claim
against that inventory (other than a BIA s. 81.1 claim, i.e., the claim for repossession of
recently delivered merchandise discussed in the section above). If the Trustee/receiver has
disposed of the inventory, the Trustee is liable for the amount of the claim to the extent of the
net amount realized, less costs of realization. The BIA affords greater protection to farmers,
fisherman and aquaculturists.
12.3.10. GST tax credit payments
BIA Rules 59, 59(1), 59(2) and 59(3)
Personal GST tax credit payments can contribute to the payment of Trustee fees but can
never be used to produce a dividend. They may be exempt from the property of the estate
depending on the circumstances:
 When a dividend is payable without taking into account the GST credit payment, it is
exempt from seizure. The total amount of GST/HST collected is returned to the bankrupt.
 When a portion of the GST credit payment would provide a dividend to creditors, that part
is exempt and that portion returned to the bankrupt.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 180
 When there is no dividend payable to the creditors, the GST credit payment is fully
seizable.
12.4. After-acquired property
12.4.1. Definition
BIA s. 99(1)
All property owned by the bankrupt, both on the date of bankruptcy and acquired after the
filing, forms part of the estate until he is discharged from bankruptcy. The property that a
bankrupt may acquire after his bankruptcy but before his discharge is called ‘after-acquired
property.’ Examples of after-acquired property include a lottery win, an inheritance, a gift, etc.
In cases involving after acquired-property, it is important that the Trustee intervene to exercise
the right of possession. Until this happens, the debtor may deal with the property as he sees fit.
Accordingly, it is important for the Trustee to keep himself informed of the financial situation of
the bankrupt throughout the bankruptcy and whether there are new developments, as the
Trustee may lose the ability to claim such property afterwards.
It is also important to ensure that the bankrupt is aware of his duty to advise the Trustee of any
after-acquired property he may receive prior to his discharge. While a failure to disclose new
developments may mean that the Trustee might lose the ability to claim the property and the
bankrupt will have the benefit of it, the failure to disclose would also be a bankruptcy offense that
could have dire consequences on the ability to obtain a discharge, or on the conditions of
discharge.
If the Trustee learns of any after-acquired property, he must intervene by requesting the
bankrupt turn over the property or monetary funds immediately.
12.4.2. When the Trustee refuses or neglects to act
BIA s. 38
When the Trustee refuses or neglects to take a proceeding for the benefit of the estate, BIA
s. 38 permits a creditor to take the proceeding under specific conditions for its own benefit
and at its own expense. A number of creditors may join together to take such proceedings.
This is a complex process that should that only be dealt with by the Trustee.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 181
12.5. Surplus income
12.5.1. Trustee’s actions
BIA s. 68(1), 68(3), 68(6), 68(7), 68(10), 68(13), 170.1(1) and 173(1)
BIA Rule 105
Directive 11R2
If the bankrupt is in receipt of wages, salary or other remuneration, the BIA requires that the
bankrupt contribute to his estate, taking into consideration standards developed by the
Superintendent of Bankruptcy to establish the amount of income the bankrupt must be able
to retain to support himself and his family. He is allowed to maintain a reasonable standard of
living during the bankruptcy period, but must remit the required surplus income payment as
established by the OSB Standards. Directive 11R sets out such standards.
The Trustee will fix the amount the bankrupt is required to pay according to the Directive and
the family situation of the bankrupt. The Trustee will notify the Official Receiver of the amount
of surplus income payment. The Official Receiver will advise if he feels the amount is not
substantially in accordance with the standards.
When the bankrupt disputes the amount recommended, or if he so requests, mediation will
occur. Mediation may cause a change in the amount of surplus income as originally fixed by
the Trustee. Rule 105 sets out all the mediation procedures.
If the mediation does not resolve the dispute, the Trustee can apply to the court to have
surplus income payments determined.
If the bankrupt either refuses or neglects to pay the required amount, the Trustee can go to
court to obtain an order pursuant to BIA s. 68 that can be served upon the employer of the
bankrupt to pay the amount directly to the Trustee. The Trustee should also report the
bankrupt’s refusal or failure to pay in its report on the bankrupt’s discharge under BIA s. 170.
If the discharge of a bankrupt individual is opposed by a creditor or the Trustee solely on
grounds referred to in either one or both of paragraphs s. 173(1)(m) and (n), the Trustee
must send an application for mediation, in the prescribed form, to the Official Receiver within
five days after the day on which the bankrupt would have been automatically discharged had
the opposition not been filed with the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy, or within
any further time after that day that the Official Receiver may allow. If the issues submitted to
mediation are not resolved by the mediation, or if the bankrupt failed to comply with the
conditions that were established as a result of the mediation, the Trustee must, without delay,
apply to the court for an appointment for the hearing of the matter.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 182
12.6. Asset value assessment
12.6.1. Why value assets?
To ensure that the assets of the bankrupt estate are not sold for less than what they are
worth, reasonable steps are taken to determine the value prior to the Trustee making a sale.
This typically includes commissioning professional appraisers to provide valuations.
Early valuation of the assets of the bankrupt estate provides:
 a basis for reporting to creditors on anticipated realizations; and
 supporting documentation for amounts that are eventually realized.
12.6.2. Valuation assumptions
CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice No. 17 and 20
There are many different ways to value the same asset – liquidation value, private sale, retail
sale, going concern, etc. The Trustee should obtain a valuation of the asset so that he can
report to the approving parties the basis of the sale price.
When requesting a valuation assessment, the value can differ significantly depending upon
the assumptions used in the valuation process and the type of asset being valued.
If you are using a third-party appraiser, the assumptions used to value the asset must be
clearly set out in the valuation report so that you can challenge the assumptions and, if
required, compare the valuation to another valuation. For instance, if you were to value an
industrial rental property, the property could be valued based on:
 using the discounted rental value of the rents on the existing rent roll, or
 on future rent increases using the current vacancy rate or a lower vacancy rate;
 using different discount rates (for example, using 5% vs. 7%);
 assuming that the building becomes vacant and the use of the property changes or the
property is rezoned for residential uses;
 using market comparisons using recent sales of similar properties in the area;
 using the cost of construction of a similar property, with an allowance for depreciation.
Similarly, if you were to going to value inventory you could value it:
 based on selling it at retail through the debtor’s business;
 at liquidation value through auction; or
 as a private sale to a competitor based on a negotiated value of the cost of the inventory.
The assumptions should be logical, supportable and clearly set out in the valuation report.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 183
The Trustee can perform certain valuations himself (e.g., valuing inventory based on retail
prices), however, qualified third parties should perform the majority of the valuations (e.g.,
real estate appraisals, equipment and machinery valuations). This will protect the Trustee
from claims that the values actually achieved were too low. Note that CAIRP Standard of
Professional Practice No. 17 sets out certain actions the Trustee/receiver should perform
regarding valuations.
12.6.3. Perform cost/benefit analysis for each type of valuation
Each valuation method will yield a different gross realization amount and each method will
have a different cost structure for the costs of realizations. The aim of the Trustee is to
achieve the best net realizations in a reasonable time frame. The concept of “best realization”
does not necessarily mean the highest proceeds, but rather a delicate balance between
maximizing proceeds, minimizing costs, controlling the time frame and reducing execution
risk. The concept of “best realization” involves professional judgement and assessment of
risk and rewards. For example, there is very little point in getting a fantastic price for the
assets from someone who ultimately does not pay the sale price. Similarly, there is little point
in getting a great price from someone who will destroy the building in the process of taking
the assets away, leaving the Trustee with complications and claims from the owner of the
building.
It is critical to perform a cost/benefit analysis to present all the information to those who will
approve the method of sale. For example, if you were to value a retail chain’s inventory
based on an auction versus selling the inventory through the retail store network, the gross
realizations of the retail value would most likely exceed the gross realizations from an
auction. However, the costs of maintaining the store network (rent, employees) may exceed
the costs of the auction (moving to central location, no employees, commission).
12.7. Mode of realizations
12.7.1. Sales methods
BIA s. 30
There are many different sales methods that the Trustee may use. The court, secured
creditor or inspectors, as appropriate, must approve the method chosen to sell assets.
Different methods are appropriate in different circumstances and the method recommended
should be supported by explanation.
The BIA states that the Trustee may, with the permission of inspectors, sell or otherwise
dispose of, any of the bankrupt’s assets including the following:
 all or any part of the property of the bankrupt;
 goodwill of the business; and
 book debts.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 184
Such price or other consideration must also be approved by inspectors.
The sale might be done by one of the following means:
 sale by tender;
 public auction;
 private sale;
 retail; or
 bulk sale, or
 sale as a going concern.
12.7.2. Private sale
Since the Trustee's aim is to obtain the best net realization, a private sale should only be
conducted when there is a compelling reason to do so. This might be advisable when the
value is well known and established (for example, selling gold to a trader), or when the
asset(s) to be sold are no longer part of a competitive market or it is urgent to dispose of
them. Private sales may create the appearance of preference to the purchaser. The assets
available for sale should be exposed to the market so that every interested party knows the
asset is available and can contact the Trustee for information. A private sale does not allow
for this exposure.
The Trustee always possesses the right to carry out a private sale or sale by mutual
agreement. It is his duty to evaluate and estimate reasonably if a private sale would be more
profitable than a sale by tender or a public auction sale. An appraisal should be obtained to
support the selling price.
In many cases, private negotiations are not likely to be appropriate. However, when assets
not commonly sold on a competitive market or assets of a highly specialized nature are
involved, the Trustee may declare himself satisfied with being able to identify potential buyers
without having to call for tenders.
12.7.3. Tender
CAIRP Rule of Professional Conduct No. 1
CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice No. 14 and 19
Sales by tender establish all prospective buyers on an equal footing by specifying the terms
of sale beforehand. So long as the call for tender is properly advertised, it is a very defensible
method of sale.
When the Trustee prepares a tender sale document, it should be sufficiently complete so that
only the purchaser's name and the selling price need to be filled in. When accepted and
signed by the Trustee, it constitutes a binding purchase and sale commitment. Consequently,

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 185
the Trustee should foresee and include all possible conditions and clauses necessary to such
an agreement.
The organization of assets into lots for purposes of sale constitutes one of the most important
factors, and should be prepared in such a way that the assets will be displayed to their best
advantage to attract the bidders' interest and maximize the realization.
When the Trustee has decided which assets should be sold and how they should be
organized into lots, the terms and conditions of sale can then be decided upon. Since the
terms and conditions incorporated into a public tender are legally binding, the lawyer who will
complete the contract should be consulted so that no legal technicality is overlooked.
When the Trustee has identified and grouped the assets to be sold into lots, he should
prepare all the other conditions to be included in the tender document and which may appear
in the notices to be published.
Items which should be addressed include:
 the amount of the deposit which must accompany a bid, indicating conditions under which
it will be forfeited;
 whether there will be a bulk sale or a sale by separate lots;
 the way of indicating the purchase price; in block or by lot;
 sales taxes;
 disclosure that there are no warranties and an appropriate disclaimer to that effect;
 inventory lists;
 the dates on which visits of the premises can be made so that prospective purchasers
can examine the assets before making their offer;
 the time period fixed for a physical count and the adjustments which may be made, either
up or down, to the dates when the purchase and sales agreement must be signed;
 the payment of the selling price;
 the time when the assets sold should be removed from the premises;
 the insurance coverage and entitlement in case any assets are damaged between
tenders being submitted and closing;
 special problems regarding various agencies and governmental authorities; and
 the receiver's or the Trustee's right to accept or refuse the tenders submitted.
In addition to the terms and conditions that the Trustee determines, he should determine the
time limit for the receipt of bids and how the tender sale should be advertised.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 186
The terms and conditions will always contain a caution to the prospective tenderers that the
highest, or any bid, will not necessarily be accepted. In the event that no bid is acceptable,
the Trustee would reject all the bids.
The method of sale following an unsuccessful call for tender is usually decided after
reviewing the reasons for rejection of all the bids. The Trustee is at liberty to call a second
tender and/or negotiate with any of the unsuccessful tenderers. It is unethical and risky,
however, to “shop tenders” prior to the rejection of all of them. This does not preclude private
negotiations with the highest tenderers or negotiation of the terms and conditions of the
highest tender, after rejection of all the bids.
CAIRP’s Rule of Professional Conduct No. 1 requires members to conduct themselves at all
times in a manner which will maintain the good reputation of the Association and Rule 34 of
the BIA requires trustees to maintain the high standards of ethics that are central to the
maintenance of public trust and confidence in the administration of the Act. To “shop tenders”
is unfair to the tenderers who have followed the rules of the tender, and furthermore it is risky
because a member who would negotiate with tenderers while they are still bound by their
offers would likely find out that prospective purchasers no longer want to present him with
offers for future engagements, and would likely find out that prospective purchasers would
band together to make a single offer as a cohesive group, thereby eliminating the advantage
of having several prospective purchasers as a method of ensuring that a reasonable price is
obtained.
12.7.4. Auction
Professional auctioneers are selected by the Trustee to run the auction. The Trustee could
request proposals from several public auctioneers and award the contract to the public
auctioneer who has the best plan to sell the assets, or has the most experience with the type
of assets being sold. The Trustee could award the contract to the auctioneer who commits
himself to selling the merchandise for the highest net price. To establish this net price, a
listing of the assets is given to the auctioneers who will review it and estimate what the final
realization at auction would be based on prior experience. The auctioneer may then bid for
the contract by establishing a ‘net minimum guaranteed price’. This is the amount which the
auctioneer will guarantee to the Trustee. If the actual auction proceeds are less, then the
auctioneer will pay the difference. If the proceeds are greater, there is normally a percentage
sharing between the Trustee/receiver and the auctioneer.
Once the public auctioneer has been chosen, the Trustee should determine the following
details with him:
 the date, time and place the auction will be held;
 how the sale will be advertised;
 the arrangements for inspection;
 the physical control of assets including insurance;
 the control of receipts at the time of sale, credit terms and method of payment;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 187
 accounting reports and accountancy work;
 the auctioneer's commission;
 whether costs of moving, storage, advertising, etc. are absorbed by the auctioneer from
his commission or whether there is a cost to the receiver or Trustee; and
 the minimum guarantee that the auctioneer can offer.
Notices are usually published in newspapers, and circulars may be distributed in some
cases, listing the lots of goods to be sold, the date and the location where they may be
examined and the date and the location where the auction will be held.
At the time of the auction sale, the assets will be sold piece by piece, lot by lot, whether it is a
factory, machinery or goods.
12.7.5. Retail
In bankruptcies where the debtor is a retail store, the Trustee can continue to carry on the
business of the debtor and sell the assets such as inventory through retail channels. This will
require the Trustee to continue to employ enough employees, have strong controls over cash
receipts and negotiate with landlords to ensure that the liquidation can be held at the location,
as the lease may contain restrictions that affect how the retail sale can be conducted.
The Trustee should review the inventory composition at each location and may determine it is
wise to consolidate the inventory to fewer locations to reduce the number of
employees/locations needed. This decision needs to be considered at the onset of the sale,
but is also usually a dynamic process. The Trustee that carries on a retail sale would
continuously reassess in-store performance – to close stores, consolidate inventory and
review pricing discounts over time, to wind down operations efficiently, limit costs and allow
each remaining store to have sufficient inventory to attract consumers.
12.7.6. Going concern / bulk sale of enterprise
There are times where the Trustee determines that the operations of the insolvent company
are worth more if sold as a whole, than if the assets were sold individually. This is usually the
case if there is a strong employee base, established customers or the company is providing a
needed product or service. The Trustee should ensure that there are sufficient funds
available to operate the business until a sale can be concluded.
12.8. Notice requirements
12.8.1. General
The Personal Property Security Acts (PPSA) in many provinces also impose duties and
obligations on receivers. These duties and obligations typically include a requirement to file,
and sometimes publish, a notice of appointment. This provides notice of the appointment to

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 188
the debtor and other creditors, notice of an intended disposition of assets, and the
preparation and filing of financial statements by the receiver.
In the province of Quebec, it is Book 9 of the Civil Code of Quebec (CCQ) which governs the
publication of rights.
Section 2934 of the QCC mentions that “the publication of rights is effected by their registration
in the register of personal and movable real rights (RPMRR) or in the land register, unless
some other mode is expressly permitted by law.”
The first is for rights pertaining to immovable property, the latter is for rights pertaining to
moveable property.
Consulting these registers enables the reader to be aware of all securities or prior notices
published against the asset, e.g., the exercise of a hypothecary right.
Similarly, if a security was given under section 427 of the Bank Act, in most cases on
inventories, a registration of a notice of intention to give such a security must be registered
with the appropriate agency of the Bank of Canada. The registration of other notices is also
required to take possession of property covered by the security.
You should consult the relevant legislation to identify the duties imposed by these Acts.
12.9. Approvals required
12.9.1. Inspector / court / secured creditor
BIA s. 30(4)
Once the Trustee has completed his analysis of the different methods of valuation, performed
a cost/benefit analysis and determined the expected time to conclude a transaction, approval
must be obtained by the inspectors to initiate the sales process.
The Trustee will prepare a report for the inspectors setting out the benefits and net
realizations of each sales method that has been researched for the assets. The Trustee will
recommend the sales method he feels will result in the highest net recovery in a reasonable
time frame.
Note, in the case of related parties, section 30(4) of the BIA states:
“The Trustee may sell or otherwise dispose of any of the bankrupt’s property to a person who
is related to the bankrupt only with the court’s authorization.”
12.9.2. Confidentiality agreement
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 17
Prior to allowing an interested party to review the debtor’s books and records or to view the
assets, the Trustee will commonly require that he receives a signed confidentiality

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 189
agreement. CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 17 suggests a form be used.
Certain information may be proprietary to the debtor company and should not be released to
the general public. The confidentiality agreement will control the release of information.
12.9.3. Purchase and sale agreement
Competing offers to purchase may be received by the Trustee containing not only different
purchase prices, but also different terms and conditions. The Trustee must review the
transaction documents carefully to ensure that they possess the right to sell the asset (i.e.,
they are not selling third-party property and have the power to sell property as set out in a
court order or under a security agreement). In addition, the Trustee must be sure that the
transaction documents release the estate from future liability. Generally, the assets are sold
‘as is, where is’.
In order to avoid the receipt of offers using different terms and conditions, the Trustee could
prepare a standard form of offer. Legal counsel should review the standard form of offer so
that once the amount and purchaser’s name are inserted, the agreement would become
legally binding.
If the potential purchaser wished to change or add any other terms, they would be clearly
noted on the standard form of offer.
12.9.4. Auction agreement and other service agreements
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 17
The CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 17 sets out considerations that should be
included in all written agreements with parties who are assisting in the sales process.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 190
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
13. Realization of Assets

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 191
Table of Contents
13. REALIZATION OF ASSETS ... 190
13.1. Introduction ... 193
13.2. Sale authorization ... 193
13.2.1. General... 193
13.2.2. Inspectors’ approval... 194
13.2.3. Secured creditors ... 194
13.2.4. Deemed trust ... 194
13.3. Notice requirements ... 195
13.3.1. Methods... 195
13.3.2. Procedure in Quebec ... 195
13.4. Rules of Professional Conduct ... 195
13.4.1. General... 195
13.4.2. Rules of ethics regarding sales of assets ... 195
13.4.3. Duties and responsibilities of receivers ... 196
13.4.4. Duties and responsibilities of the Trustee ... 196
13.5. Recovering proceeds if conveyed to a third party ... 197
13.5.1. Power of Trustee to recover monies ... 197
13.6. Income tax returns ... 197
13.6.1. Trustee must file certain returns if not yet filed by the bankrupt ... 197
13.6.2. Deemed taxation year end in year of bankruptcy ... 198
13.6.3. Income Tax Returns ... 198
13.6.4. Tax refunds for pre- and post-bankruptcy returns ... 199
13.6.5. In bankruptcy tax return ... 199
13.7. Secured creditor ... 199

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 192
13.7.1. Dealings between the Trustee and secured creditors ... 199
13.7.2. Dealings between the debtor and secured creditors ... 200
13.8. Exempt assets ... 201
13.8.1. Provincial Legislation ... 201
13.9. Some notes on common assets ... 201
13.9.1. Monetary assets ... 201
13.9.2. Motor vehicles ... 201
13.9.3. Houses ... 202
13.9.4. Accounts receivable... 203
13.9.5. Registered Retirement Savings Plan ... 205
13.9.6. Life insurance policies ... 205
13.9.7. Other assets ... 206
13.10. Trust accounts ... 206
13.10.1. Not property of the bankrupt ... 206
13.10.2. How to identify ... 206
13.11. Property incapable of being realized ... 207
13.11.1. What to do with the property? ... 207

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 193
13.1. Introduction
Module objective
At the end of this module, you will be able to describe the process for realization of assets.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 17(1), 20, 22, 30, 67(1)(c), 69, 74, 97, 98, 117(2), 120 (1), 127-134, 147 and 170.1
 BIA Rules 34-53, 121
 BIA Circular 2R2
 Directives 10R, 16R and 25
 CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 17
 CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct
 ITA s. 128 and s. 782-785 of the Taxation Act (Quebec)
13.2. Sale authorization
13.2.1. General
Both a Trustee and receiver generally require the approval of certain parties, such as
inspectors, secured creditors, court, etc. in order to sell assets.
As discussed in Module 12, the Trustee requires approval for the realization or sales method
that would be used to sell an asset. Once the results of the sale methods are known, the
Trustee will then require prior written approval from the inspectors, after passing a resolution
at an inspectors meeting, to actually enter into a sale or other agreement.
The Trustee will prepare the report to the approving party detailing the following:
 summary description of the process undertaken;
 description of offers received;
 analysis of the offers, in terms of:
o purchase price;
o closing dates;
o post purchase adjustments;
 any other pertinent information; and a
 recommendation as to which offer to accept.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 194
There are times when the approval for the sales method and the actual realization are one
and the same, e.g., when selling inventory through the bankrupt’s retail stores. In these
cases, only the approval for the sales method is required.
The Trustee/receiver must obtain written approval prior to entering into a purchase and sale
agreement. The approving party differs according to the type of appointment:
 a court-appointed receiver must obtain prior written court approval;
 a privately appointed receiver must obtain approval from the appointing secured creditor;
and
 a Trustee must obtain prior written authorization of the inspectors.
13.2.2. Inspectors’ approval
BIA s. 30, 117(2) and 120(1)
The BIA states that the Trustee may sell assets with the permission of the inspectors. If there
is more than one inspector of the estate, the approval from the majority of the inspectors is
required. If there is a tie, the BIA indicates the method to resolve the issue. To begin with, the
opinion of the inspectors not in attendance (if any) should be sought. If that fails to resolve
the issue, the Trustee can resolve the tie as long as the issue under discussion does not
involve the conduct or remuneration of the Trustee.
Be aware that no inspector may acquire property of the estate, except with the prior approval
of the court.
13.2.3. Secured creditors
BIA s.127- 134
In cases where there is equity is an asset, over and above the value owed to the properly
secured creditor, the Trustee may wish to redeem the security and realize on the asset.
Unless the Trustee is confident that he can redeem the security by paying the full redemption
price to the secured creditor, the Trustee must seek the approval of the secured creditor prior
to the asset’s sale. In some cases, the secured creditor may not respond to such requests,
and the BIA provides the Trustee with a process to sell the asset. This process is covered in
more detail later in this module in the section “Dealings between Trustee and secured
creditors”.
13.2.4. Deemed trust
If the estimated proceeds of the sale of the estate’s inventory and accounts receivables will
not fully extinguish the liability for the payroll source withholdings deemed trust, the Trustee
should enter into an “Administrative Agreement” with Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) to
determine the amount of Trustee’s fees which are to be paid ahead of the deemed trust.
Directors of the company may be personally liable for the unpaid balance of the payroll

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 195
source withholdings liability and the CRA or other tax authorities may actively pursue these
amounts. Obtaining the government’s prior approval along with careful documentation of the
sales process may help protect the Trustee/receiver from claims of improvident realization or
from a dispute regarding the reasonableness of the remuneration claimed.
A similar agreement should also be entered into with the Quebec Revenue Agency.
13.3. Notice requirements
13.3.1. Methods
When an asset is being realized, certain legislations (PPSA and the Bank Act, for example)
require notices of the upcoming sale to be either published in a newspaper or sent via
registered mail to a defined mailing list.
13.3.2. Procedure in Quebec
Under the Quebec Civil Code, a secured creditor who intends to enforce his security outside
of a bankruptcy event must send the debtor a 20-day notice to repay the debt, for a movable,
and a 60-day notice for an immovable asset. When the contract is governed by the
Consumer Protection Act, the delay is 30 days, and in the case of taking possession for
administrative purposes the delay is 10 days.
The secured creditor must state in this notice the method considered for realizing his security
(taking as payment, sale by the secured creditor, sale under judicial authority, possession for
administration purposes).
Such a notice is often sent with the Notice of Intent to Enforce a Security under section 244
of the BIA.
13.4. Rules of Professional Conduct
13.4.1. General
Every sales transaction performed by the Trustee/receiver could be subject to an objection by
a person affected by the insolvency. Claims against the Trustee/receiver could range from
selling the asset at too low a price, to not following a tender process correctly, to the
Trustee/receiver negligently performing his duties.
To ensure that the Trustee and receiver protect themselves from such claims, they must
ensure that they have obtained all required approvals and they must also comply with the
CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct and the rules set out in the BIA. They must also be
aware of court decisions.
13.4.2. Rules of ethics regarding sales of assets
Every Trustee/receiver is required to follow the CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct. These
rules are based on CAIRP’s principles that each member must conduct himself at all times in

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 196
a manner which will maintain the good reputation of the Association and each member must
perform his professional engagements with integrity and due care. With respect to the sale of
assets, CAIRP Rule of Professional Conduct No. 6 and its interpretation prevents a member,
his partners/associates, his staff or their families, from purchasing assets from an estate
unless they meet certain conditions.
BIA Rule 43 has similar provisions regarding to whom and on what conditions a Trustee may
sell assets. BIA Rules 42 and 43 also have provisions restricting a Trustee from acquiring
assets from another estate that is not under his supervision, except under certain conditions.
13.4.3. Duties and responsibilities of receivers
The duties and responsibilities of a receiver consist of selling the assets in his possession (or
the interest therein) for the best realization he can obtain in the circumstances (as discussed
in Module 12). To do so, the receiver should take all the necessary measures and means for
obtaining the best (usually, but not always the highest) price in order to safeguard the interest
not only of the secured creditor who appointed him, but also of the lower ranking secured
creditors and the ordinary creditors.
If a receiver can demonstrate that he has taken all reasonable steps to obtain the best
realization, no one will likely be able to successfully contest his decisions. It is therefore
important for the receiver to properly document the decisions made and the reasoning behind
these decisions.
13.4.4. Duties and responsibilities of the Trustee
BIA s. 30
BIA Rules 34-53
The BIA states that "The Trustee may, with the permission of the inspectors (...) sell or
otherwise dispose of for such price or other consideration as the inspectors may approve all
or any part of the property of the bankrupt, including the goodwill of the business, if any, and
the book debts due or growing due to the bankrupt, by tender, public auction or private
contract, with power to transfer the whole thereof to any person or company, or to sell the
same in parcels."
The Trustee is also bound by the BIA Rules which deal with the ethical questions. Rule 42
sets out the rules under which a Trustee may purchase assets from an estate.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 197
13.5. Recovering proceeds if conveyed to a third party
13.5.1. Power of Trustee to recover monies
BIA s. 98
The BIA gives the Trustee power to recover monies or other proceeds from a person who
acquired property from the bankrupt through a transaction that is void or voidable. This power
may be exercised even in situations where the person that acquired them had resold or
disposed of the property. The Trustee is even allowed to recover monies or other proceeds
from third parties unless the transaction was conducted in good faith.
13.6. Income tax returns9
13.6.1. Trustee must file certain returns if not yet filed by the bankrupt
BIA s. 22
Income tax refunds can represent a major source of recovery for trustees, not only in
personal bankruptcies, but also in corporate bankruptcies and receiverships. The BIA
provides as follows:
"The Trustee is not liable to make any return that the bankrupt was required to make
more than one year prior to the commencement of the calendar year, or the fiscal
year of the bankrupt where that is different from the calendar year, in which he
became a bankrupt."

As an example, an individual becoming bankrupt on September 30, 2009, would result in the
Trustee being obligated to file the 2007, 2008 and 2009 (pre- and post-bankruptcy) tax
returns The Trustee would be obligated to file the 2007 return if it has not been filed, because
that return was due to be filed by April 30, 2008, and that date is less than one year before
the commencement of the calendar year in which he became bankrupt (i.e., 2008).
Obviously, the Trustee is allowed to file income tax returns for earlier years as well, and this
would be prudent where tax refunds are available. However, you should be aware that the
Income Tax Act has provisions that limit the number of prior year tax returns for which
Canada Revenue Agency (hereafter “CRA”) can issue refunds. Use of the fairness provision
may allow for filings beyond the prescribed number of years.
You must recognize those situations where the filing of the income tax returns is important.
Where funds are available for distribution, it is important to ensure that the proper tax
indebtedness is established in order not to prejudice other creditors (by diluting any dividends

9 The text here makes reference to the Income Tax Act and the Canada Revenue Agency (or CRA), however you should know
that the practice and rules are very similar as regards the Quebec Income Tax Act, the Quebec Tax Administration Act and the
Quebec Revenue Agency (or QRA).

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 198
paid). Also, you should be aware of those situations where losses of the bankrupt are
available to "carry back" to prior years in order to recover previous taxes paid.
The income tax situation of an individual should be addressed at the initial interview stage.
Many trustees utilize a checklist in order to properly assess the status of the income tax
returns and the possibilities for recovery.
13.6.2. Deemed taxation year end in year of bankruptcy
During the year in which an individual files an assignment in bankruptcy or if a bankruptcy
order is made, there is a deemed year-end at the date of the bankruptcy. This generally
results in two income tax returns being filed by the Trustee. These returns are commonly
referred to as the pre- bankruptcy and the post-bankruptcy income tax returns. When filing
the returns the following items should be addressed:
 Tax debts incurred in the pre- or prior years' returns represent a provable claim in the
bankruptcy estate. This debt is only known upon the filing of the return. Therefore, it is
critical to obtain all tax information early in the administration to establish the claim, if any.
Tax debts in the post-bankruptcy period are the responsibility of the bankrupt.
 Losses of the bankrupt up to the date of the bankruptcy are available to be used or
carried back to prior years. Losses cannot be carried forward into the post-bankruptcy
period.
 Pre-bankruptcy refunds can legitimately be offset by CRA for prior years' taxes unpaid or
to debts to federal government programs (i.e., Canada Student Loan Program or
Employment Insurance Commission) because of overpayments. Also, CRA may offset a
pre-bankruptcy refund against other amounts due, e.g., unremitted source deductions or
GST refunds. Post-bankruptcy refunds cannot be offset against pre-bankruptcy
indebtedness but in some circumstances may be withheld. Should CRA offset against a
post-bankruptcy tax return, the Administrator should bring this to the attention of the
Trustee.
13.6.3. Income Tax Returns
It is important to know the proper process for preparing tax returns and the importance of
good relationships with CRA.
CRA has set-up an Insolvency Division in some offices and has teams specialized that are
familiar with bankruptcies and insolvencies available to deal with trustees for administrative
purposes. They will file proof of claims, voting letters and participate in the administration
process (meeting of creditors, etc.) if needed. This can be a good source of assistance to the
Trustee when creditor input is needed.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 199
13.6.4. Tax refunds for pre- and post-bankruptcy returns
BIA s. 67(1)(c)
ITA s. 128 and s. 782-785 of the Quebec Tax Act
When a debtor files for bankruptcy, the Trustee will notify CRA through the DC905 form. This
will update the CRA file and prompt CRA to send any tax refunds to the Trustee resulting
from the returns filed for prior years, pre-bankruptcy and post-bankruptcy.
In the event that a bankrupt personally receives a prior, pre or post-bankruptcy tax refund, he
is required to turn this refund over to the Trustee.
In Quebec, the Quebec Revenue Agency considers tax returns to be non-transferable and
non-seizable and refuses to send them to the Trustee.
13.6.5. In bankruptcy tax return
There is another income tax return that the Trustee may be required to file. This return is
often referred to as the "In Bankruptcy Tax Return." The provisions for preparing this return
are set out in the Income Tax Act and the Quebec Tax Act.
Generally, this return relates to dealings in the estate of the bankrupt or acts performed in the
continuation of the bankrupt’s business by the Trustee. For instance, a Trustee who receives
contributions made within the last 12 months from the RRSP of a bankrupt is required to file
an In Bankruptcy return that would reflect the RRSP funds as income as well as any tax
deducted. No personal credits or exemption are allowed. Any refund on this return is an
estate asset, and any balance due would be payable by the estate.
As previously indicated, income tax refunds can be a major area of recovery in bankrupt
estates. However, they can require a significant amount of the time necessary to administer
the bankruptcy. Tax returns should be completed on a timely basis as outstanding tax
refunds can result in an estate remaining open for longer than is required under the Act.
13.7. Secured creditor
13.7.1. Dealings between the Trustee and secured creditors
BIA s. 69 and 84.2
Directive 10R
Module 11 discusses the need to review the debtor’s records for indications of
encumbrances. During this review, identification of secured creditors will be made. A secured
creditor is a person holding a mortgage, pledge, charge, lien or privilege on or against the
property of the debtor as security for a debt due from the debtor. These creditors are free to

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 200
deal with their security and realize upon it in the ordinary course of business, unless
specifically prohibited from doing so by an order of the court.
Accordingly, a secured creditor may request from the Trustee the return of any property subject
to its security. This is a common occurrence with regard to a vehicle owned by the bankrupt but
subject to a security agreement.
Although the secured creditor can deal with his security, he also has a duty to obtain a
commercially reasonable price for the property subject to the security. He is required to
provide the Trustee with a full accounting of the sales transaction and any surplus proceeds
are to be remitted to the Trustee for the general benefit of creditors. The exception to this is
where a secured creditor has foreclosed on a mortgage or, in Quebec, where a secured
creditor has exercised the hypothecary right of “taking in payment”, or where the secured
creditor has put the Trustee on notice to elect to redeem the security and the Trustee has not
elected to redeem the security or to cause the asset to be sold (discussed later in this
section).
The secured creditor may prove an unsecured claim in three ways:
 he can prove the balance owed to him after deducting the net amount realized from the
sale of the asset under the security; or
 he can prove the full amount owing if the asset under the security agreement is
surrendered to the Trustee; or
 he can prove the balance owing to him after valuing his security without selling it and
making a claim as an unsecured creditor for the difference between his total claim and
the value at which he assesses his security.
If the secured creditor assesses the value of the asset, the Trustee is given the right to:
 redeem the secured creditor at the valued amount;
 elect to have the asset sold on terms and conditions as agreed between the creditor and
the Trustee if dissatisfied with the value at which the security is assessed.
The BIA also permits the secured creditor to take the initiative and attempt to dispose of the
Trustee's interest without realizing on his security. This may be done by requiring the Trustee
to decide whether or not to redeem at valuation or realize the security. If the Trustee fails to
do so, the interest that was vested in him must vest with the creditor.
13.7.2. Dealings between the debtor and secured creditors
As previously noted, upon filing the assignment, all the bankrupt’s assets vest in the Trustee,
including assets subject to a security interest (such as a car with a lien on it or real estate
with a mortgage). In some cases, the value of the asset is not sufficient to repay the loan.
The Trustee reviews the security position of the secured creditor and, with permission of the
inspectors and sometimes after receiving legal advice, will "release" the asset to the secured
creditor.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 201
In some cases, the secured creditor chooses to continue dealing with the bankrupt by
allowing him to keep his property (for example, a vehicle or a house) and continue with the
payment. This is very often the case with a house, as the bankrupt continues to live in the
house and make the mortgage payments. If the Trustee is of the opinion that there is equity
in the assets for the estate (and the house or equity is not exempt property), it is the
Trustee's obligation to obtain that equity for the creditors by taking possession of the asset,
selling it and then paying off the secured creditor's lien. The remaining funds will then be
available to the creditors.
13.8. Exempt assets
13.8.1. Provincial Legislation
Pursuant to provincial legislation, certain assets are exempt from seizure by the creditors and
the bankrupt is allowed to claim these assets as exempt and request that the Trustee not
take possession of same. The exempt assets vary from province to province and you should
be very familiar with the legislation that provides for exemptions in your province. You should
review the notes in Module 12 that explain what is exempt property.
13.9. Some notes on common assets
13.9.1. Monetary assets
BIA s. 17(1)
Assets, such as monies paid into court pursuant to a garnishee order, contributions to
RRSP's within 12 months of the assignment, RESP’s, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, cash
surrender values or loan value of life insurance policies not exempt from seizure and bank
account balances, can be recovered by a Trustee by sending a letter to the relevant party.
The letter should include: a certified true copy of the bankruptcy order or assignment, a copy
of the Trustee's Certificate of Appointment and a demand that the property be delivered to
the Trustee.
13.9.2. Motor vehicles
BIA s. 30(4)
Motor vehicles may be exempt from seizure in many provinces depending upon the value of
the vehicle. If a motor vehicle is not exempt, the Trustee should immediately take possession
of the motor vehicle or make arrangements for the bankrupt or a third party to provide fair
value for the vehicle. The Trustee should ensure that the vehicle is properly insured. Note, in
the case of related parties, Section 30(4) of the BIA states:
“The Trustee may sell or otherwise dispose of any of the bankrupt’s property to a person who
is related to the bankrupt only with the court’s authorization.”

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 202
To determine value, the Trustee could inspect the vehicle noting general condition,
cleanliness, mileage, options and accessories and/or may refer to `blue book' (retail) or
`black book' (wholesale) references to estimate the value of the vehicle. The Trustee should
have a secure facility in which to store the vehicle until the sale. Once the Trustee has
decided on the value and method of sale, he should proceed to sell the vehicle with the
inspectors' approval. Once sold, he should arrange for a refund of any unexpired insurance
premiums and a refund of any motor vehicle registration fees if sold to a third party.
13.9.3. Houses
BIA s. 74
Exemption laws dealing with a bankrupt’s principal residence vary considerably from province
to province. The Trustee should immediately determine if there is non-exempt equity in the
property for the estate. The Trustee should obtain an opinion of value or an appraisal from an
accredited appraiser, as is appropriate in the circumstances. If the estate has an equitable
interest in the property, the Trustee should register that interest. In the event the Trustee is
going to sell the property, he should ensure that the property is properly insured and have the
estate listed as named insured and loss payee on the insurance policy.
The Trustee will have to estimate the estate's equity in the property by determining the
amount of taxes, mortgages, liens, etc., are outstanding and deduct this from the appraised
value.
If the property is owned jointly, the other owner(s) may wish to purchase the estate's interest.
If the other owner is not in a position to purchase and is not co-operative in selling the
property, the Trustee may apply to court for an order under the applicable provincial
legislation (where applicable) to force a sale of the property. If there is no way to terminate
the co-ownership, the Trustee may have to wait until the property is sold to collect the
bankrupt’s share of the equity in the property, or may try to sell the interest in the joint
ownership.
The Trustee and inspectors will have to decide on a method of sale. If it is decided to list the
property for sale with a realtor, care should be taken to ensure that a commission is payable
only upon closing of a sale. The Trustee and inspectors should reach an agreement on:
 list price;
 period of the listing;
 commission rate;
 realtors to be used;
 any items to be included in the sale, such as window coverings or appliances; and
 whether or not the listing is to exclude any identified potential purchasers.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 203
The Trustee should ensure that a disclaimer is included with the agreement of purchase and
sale stating that the property is being sold “as is, where is” with no warranty of any kind
whatsoever.
In most circumstances the Trustee will insist that the listing be registered with a multiple
listing service.
Once an acceptable offer has been received and accepted by the Trustee with the
inspector's approval, the Trustee should employ a solicitor to handle the closing of the sale.
The Trustee must carefully review all closing documents, particularly the statements of
adjustments, and execute them. Insurance policies should then be cancelled and refunds of
unexpired premiums requested.
13.9.4. Accounts receivable
BIA s. 67(1) and 69.3(1)
A common responsibility of a receiver, Trustee or agent is to collect the accounts receivable
of a debtor.
On taking possession, initial demand letters should be sent by registered mail. As there are
likely transactions not posted in the records of the debtor, it is important to recognize that the
actual balance at date of appointment may differ from that initially shown in the records.
Therefore, the initial demand letter should refer to a "preliminary review of the records" or
"the records of the debtor" and indicate a particular amount of money is outstanding. If a
Statement of Account can be provided at this time, it assists the addressee in reconciling the
balance demanded to his records.
The demand for immediate payment and request that you be contacted if payment cannot be
made will prompt the addressee to respond with information on the account regarding
payment terms extended, unprocessed payments or credits, claims of set-off or other
disputes. By putting the addressee on notice that "payment to any other party will not
discharge (his) liability to (the debtor)," you reduce the risk of payment being made to a
garnishing unsecured creditor or the debtor himself.
At the time of your appointment, the debtor's accounts receivable records are unlikely to be
up to date. Therefore, the last transactions processed should be identified and the records
updated for all unrecorded pre-appointment transactions. Ensure all shipments have been
invoiced and that all invoices, payments and credit notes have been posted.
Where a receiver or Trustee continues operations, it is important that post-appointment sales
and related payments be recorded in separate records, including separate ledger cards.
All records in support of pre-appointment receivables should be found. This will include
invoices, ledger cards, purchase orders or contracts, signed bills of lading or other delivery
receipts and details of any security held. The pre-appointment accounts receivable ledger
should be regularly updated as payments are received, credits are issued or write-offs are
made during the collection process.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 204
Other potential receivables should be identified and notified. Such receivables may arise from
security deposits, refunds of taxes and duties, refunds of insurance premiums (do not cancel
any existing insurance policies without senior approval), suppliers with credit balances, bank
accounts, life insurance with cash surrender value or loan value, supplier rebates, etc.
In the collection of receivables, the debtor’s customers will raise valid and invalid issues in an
effort to reduce or eliminate their payments. Common issues raised by customers include the
following:
 Lack of warranty, service or parts supply. Where such support was included in the terms
of the sale and such support will not be provided in the future, an adjustment is warranted
and would have to be negotiated or settled before the court.
 Set-off against other debts or losses. Whether a right of set-off exists or not can be a
complex issue and legal advice should be sought.
 Goods or services not supplied to promised standard. Each situation must be
investigated to determine the facts. If the customer's claim is correct, an adjustment will
have to be negotiated or the deficiency remedied.
 Return goods for credit. Unless the terms of sale provide for a `buy back' at the
customer's discretion, there is normally no requirement to accept returned goods for
credit.
 Conflicting demands. A debtor's customer may have received demands from other parties
in respect of their debt. CRA may have issued third party demands to recover income
taxes, employee income tax withheld but not remitted, federal sales tax or excise owed.
Unsecured creditors may have served garnishing orders to collect an outstanding
judgement. In some provinces, sub-contractors or trades may have put an owner or
general contractor on notice that they have a trust claim on the amounts due pursuant to
provincial Construction or Builders Lien Acts. Consult your Trustee immediately for further
instruction if the customer is making such a representation.
In any of the situations above, the customer will require assurance that he is making payment
to the correct party. If he is not satisfied on this aspect, the customer will refuse to pay
anyone or pay the court the amount due less his costs in so doing. Garnishing orders are the
easiest to deal with. If you are collecting as a Trustee, there is a stay of proceedings against
unsecured creditors and, consequently, such garnishing orders are stayed. The Trustee can
recover any monies paid into court pursuant to garnishing orders.
Similarly, if collecting receivables pursuant to a security interest, it should not be difficult to
provide an explanation and evidence of the priority of your demand to an unsecured
creditor's garnishing order.
Third party demands by CRA are difficult to have retracted and the Trustee should be
consulted with respect to such demands. Similarly, the advancement of trust claims should
be referred to the Trustee for a decision on how to proceed.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 205
While collecting receivables, it is important to fully document all discussions and keep copies
of all letters. Such documentation is invaluable where legal proceedings are necessary to
effect collection.
During the collection process, any steps required to preserve any security interests should be
performed. For example, in Ontario, pursuant to the Construction Lien Act, the supplier of
products or services to a job site has 45 days from substantial completion in which to file a
lien against the title of the real property improved. Other security agreements executed by the
debtor and his customers may have to be registered pursuant to provincial legislation in order
to be effective against third parties.
At some point after mailing the initial demand letter, usually between 10 and thirty days, a
second registered letter should be sent to customers having unpaid balances with an
analysis of the account. It should also give notice that, if payment or an explanation of why
the amount is not being paid is not received within a certain number of days, then appropriate
legal remedies will be sought.
After the deadline for response has passed, a decision must be made on each outstanding
account as to what follow-up method is appropriate. Options include: further follow-up by you,
referral to a collection agency or referral to a lawyer.
13.9.5. Registered Retirement Savings Plan
Directive 25R
Under section 67 of the BIA, property in a registered retirement savings plan (“RRSP”) or a
registered retirement income fund (“RRIF”) are not considered to be property of the bankrupt
and are exempt unless contribution was made within 12 months of the date of bankruptcy.
Note however, that if the RRSP is in an insurance product, the entire RRSP may be exempt
RRSPs or RRIFs may be estate assets to the extent of contributions to the plan or fund made
in the 12 months before the date of bankruptcy. If so, the Trustee will contact the financial
institution holding the RRSP and request investment contribution information. The Trustee
will request that all contribution of funds within 12 months be remitted to the Trustee, net of
withholding taxes. The estate will then necessarily have to file an income tax return.
Some RRSPs, with a named beneficiary and considered to be an annuity, may be exempt
from execution under certain provincial legislation or jurisprudence.
Other RRSPs may be set up in a way that they cannot be terminated, e.g., locked-in RRSPs.
Pension rollover from RRSP to a locked-in retirement account (“LIRA”) is exempt.
13.9.6. Life insurance policies
Directive 25R
Insurance legislation varies from province to province. Generally, the Trustee is entitled to
realize on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if it is payable to the estate of the bankrupt.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 206
If the policy is payable to a designated beneficiary, it is necessary to check with the Trustee
whether the policy is considered exempt property or can be considered an asset of the
estate. The determination of whether the policy is exempt property will depend on a number
of factors such as the specific provisions applicable to insurance contracts in your province,
whether the designation of the beneficiary is revocable or irrevocable, or the identity of the
named beneficiary.
Life insurance policies which are ‘whole life policies', or otherwise have a cash surrender
value, can usually be liquidated in two ways, if they are not considered exempt property. The
easiest method is to simply cancel the policy and request the cash surrender value. However,
this can be particularly damaging to the bankrupt if he cannot replace the policy due to age or
health. In such circumstances, the Trustee might request the maximum loan value of the
policy (perhaps 60% - 80% of cash surrender value). Then he would have the bankrupt
contribute the difference between cash surrender value and the loan proceeds.
13.9.7. Other assets
The Trustee can also realize on Canada Savings Bonds that are purchased by payroll
deduction or burials plots owned by the bankrupt, to name a few.
13.10. Trust accounts
13.10.1. Not property of the bankrupt
BIA s. 67
The BIA provides that property held by the bankrupt in trust for another person is excluded
from property divisible amongst his creditors. As discussed in Module 12, trusts created by
statute will serve to remove trust funds from the bankruptcy administration.
13.10.2. How to identify
The bankrupt must disclose proper documentation of the establishment of the trust and a
listing of the assets held by the trust. If you are unsure whether the assets are under a trust,
you should refer the matter to your Trustee and delay the realization of the assets until the
matter is resolved.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 207
13.11. Property incapable of being realized
13.11.1. What to do with the property?
BIA s. 40(1)
Directive 16R
There may be situations where the Trustee cannot find a buyer for a particular estate asset,
e.g., contaminated real property, obsolete technology, etc., and the Trustee is unable to
realize upon this asset. There may be other cases where, in the opinion of the Trustee, there
would be no financial benefit to the estate to sell an asset as the costs of realization would
exceed or equal the realizable value of the asset.
Since all property legally vests with the Trustee upon bankruptcy, the Trustee must conclude
all matters relating to the estate. The Trustee, with the permission of inspectors, shall return
to the bankrupt any property that the Trustee was incapable of realizing on when the Trustee
is discharged. Before discharge, the Trustee could have other options, such as disclaiming
his interest in real property, or asking the court to make an order if the Trustee is unable to
dispose of the property.
The Trustee should document the reasons why the property was incapable of realization.
Directive 16R provides direction on what and how information should be listed on the
Statement of Affairs.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 208
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
14. Administer Discharge of Debtor, including s. 170
Report

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 209
Table of Contents
14. ADMINISTER DISCHARGE OF DEBTOR, INCLUDING S. 170 REPORT . 208
14.1. Introduction ... 210
14.2. Proposal and bankruptcy ... 210
14.2.1. Examination of debtors ... 210
14.2.2. Debts not released ... 211
14.3. Duties of the insolvent person ... 212
14.3.1. Duties ... 212
14.3.2. Offences ... 213
14.3.3. Arrest of bankrupts ... 213
14.3.4. Trustee’s report (BIA s. 170) ... 214
14.3.5. Mediation ... 215
14.4. Bankrupt’s discharge ... 217
14.4.1. First time bankrupt ... 217
14.4.2. Facts for which a discharge may be refused, suspended or granted
conditionally ... 217
14.4.3. Court application for discharge ... 218
14.4.4. Absolute discharge ... 219
14.4.5. Suspended discharge ... 219
14.4.6. Conditional discharge ... 220
14.4.7. Refused discharge ... 220
14.5. Proposal only ... 221
14.5.1. Compliance of Division I and consumer proposal ... 221

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 210
14.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module you will be able to:
 Describe the different conditions that can affect the administration of the discharge of a
debtor.
 Identify the expectations of the Trustee’s office in assisting a debtor in obtaining a
discharge.
 Advise the debtor of all relevant information relating to the discharge.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 51(b), 52(b), 59(2), 62(2), 68, 158-159, 161-168.1(1), 168.2, 169(6), 170(1),
170.1(4-6), 172-173 (1), 176, 178 and 198-200
 BIA Form 82
 BIA Rules 15-16, 105, 115-117 and 121-121.1
 Directive 26
Please note that the word ‘debtor/bankrupt’ will be used interchangeably throughout.
14.2. Proposal and bankruptcy
14.2.1. Examination of debtors
BIA s. 161-167
BIA Rules 115-117
Upon filing an assignment or a proposal, a debtor may be required to attend an examination.
Depending on the circumstances, the examination can be held by:
 the OSB;
 the Trustee;
 the creditors; or
 other interested persons.
The BIA states that the OSB must examine the debtor under oath prior to obtaining a
discharge from bankruptcy. In practice, the OSB only requires the debtor to attend an
examination if it is determined to be necessary. The Trustee and the creditors can also
request that the OSB conduct an examination of the debtor if there are specific concerns that
should be addressed.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 211
The creditors have the authority to adjourn a meeting of creditors to review a proposal in
order to have the debtor examined. Creditors and other interested parties can also make an
application to court for an order giving them the right to examine a debtor.
Failure to attend an examination is a violation of the debtor’s duties and has serious
consequences for the debtor.
14.2.2. Debts not released
BIA s. 62(2.1), 178 and 179
There are certain classes of debts that may qualify as claims provable, but are not released
in a bankruptcy or proposal. Debts not released include:
 fines, penalties or restitution orders;
 damages awarded in a civil proceeding for bodily harm or sexual assault;
 alimony, maintenance and support arrears;
 debts or liabilities resulting from fraud, embezzlement, misappropriation or defalcation
while acting in a fiduciary capacity;
 debts or liabilities for obtaining property or services by false pretences;
 liability for a dividend that a creditor would have been entitled to receive had he been
advised of the bankruptcy;
 student loans (if it has been less than 7 years since the debtor stopped attending school);
and
 any debt for interest owed in relation to an amount referred to in any of the paragraphs
above.
Whether or not a debt will be released is not determined at the discharge hearing or upon
court approval of a proposal. The onus is on the creditor to prove that the debt should not be
released. Otherwise, the debt will be discharged.
Although a Certificate of Completion does not release these debts in a proposal, some
exceptions apply. If the proposal specifically provides that these debts will be discharged and
the affected creditor votes for the proposal, the debt will be released upon completion of the
proposal.
The list above addresses the effect of an order of discharge (or completed proposal) as
regards the claims against the debtor or the bankrupt, or the ability of a creditor to continue
efforts at collecting a claim against the debtor or bankrupt after the discharge or after a
certificate of completion of a proposal has been issued. As well, there is another category of
debts that is not released by an order of discharge or a completed proposal. This is the claim
that a creditor has against someone who is jointly responsible with the debtor for a debt, as
described in section 179 of the BIA. The fact that the principal debtor may no longer be

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 212
responsible to repay a debt does not release from liability a co-debtor, partner or surety,
except in special circumstances.
14.3. Duties of the insolvent person
14.3.1. Duties
BIA s. 158 and 198 - 200
Directive 26
The BIA imposes certain duties on a bankrupt which apply during bankruptcy and others
which continue after discharge.
The principal duties are found in BIA s. 158. Sections 198-200 refer to what constitutes a
bankruptcy offense, which further serves to codify what constitutes proper conduct of a
bankrupt (or insolvent person) within the meaning of the BIA. The duties under section 158
can be summarized as follows:
 deliver all non-exempt property to the Trustee;
 deliver credit cards to the Trustee;
 deliver books and records to the Trustee (including tax information);
 attend examination with OSB as required;
 prepare and submit a Statement of Affairs to the Trustee within the appropriate delay;
 assist Trustee with making an inventory of the assets;
 advise Trustee of all property disposed of in the past year;
 advise Trustee of all gifts and settlements in the past five years;
 attend the first meeting of creditors and answer proper questions from the creditors;
 attend other meetings of creditors or inspectors, as required;
 submit to examinations under oath, as required;
 aid in the realization of property;
 execute power of attorney, conveyances, deeds and instruments, as may be required;
 examine the correctness of proofs of claims, if requested;
 advise Trustee if he is aware that a filed claim is false;
 advise Trustee of any material change in his financial situation;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 213
 do all such acts in relation to property as may be reasonably required by the Trustee,
prescribed by the rules or ordered by the court; and
 keep Trustee advised of his current address.
A director of an insolvent corporation, or an officer that executed the assignment (or that is
designated by the Official Receiver), is also responsible to perform these duties as they
relate to the corporation.
Directive 26 requires the Trustee to explain the duties to the bankrupt. Failure to comply with
the duties without reasonable cause can result in the bankrupt either being charged with a
bankruptcy offence or in having his discharge delayed or annulled.
It is important that you are familiar with the duties and can adequately explain them to a
bankrupt.
14.3.2. Offences
BIA s. 59(2), 173 (1), 198-200 and 205
A debtor found guilty of an offence under the BIA can face several consequences:
 the discharge from bankruptcy may be refused, suspended or granted conditionally;
 the court may refuse to accept a proposal;
 the debtor could be imprisoned or fined up to $10,000, or both; and,
 depending on the severity of the transgression, the debtor could face criminal
proceedings.
Actions that constitute an offence are found in the BIA. A Trustee is required to ensure that a
debtor has:
 received a copy of these sections of the BIA;
 acknowledged receipt of these sections of the BIA; and
 acknowledged that these sections have been adequately explained.
14.3.3. Arrest of bankrupts
BIA s. 168
BIA Rules 15 and 16
The BIA outlines certain situations where the court may, by warrant, have a debtor arrested.
A warrant may be issued when:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 214
 the court has reasonable grounds to believe that the debtor has absconded or is about to
abscond from Canada with a view of avoiding payment, appearance in court or
examination with regard to the debts;
 the court has reasonable grounds to believe that the debtor is about to remove, conceal
or destroy property;
 the debtor removes property without leave of the court or Trustee; and/or
 the debtor fails to obey an order of the bankruptcy court.
14.3.4. Trustee’s report (BIA s. 170)
BIA s. 170(1)
BIA Form 82
BIA Rule 121.1
The BIA requires a Trustee to prepare a report pursuant to section 170 (1) of the BIA.
Note that the Trustee does not need to file a report in a first time bankruptcy where there is
no surplus income payment requirement and no court hearing is required.
The deadlines for filing the report vary as follows:
Bankrupt Surplus Income Deadline for s.170 Report
First time bankrupt entitled to an
Automatic Discharge
No surplus income, no
opposition to discharge (no
court)
No report required
Opposition to discharge During the 8th month after the date
of the bankruptcy
Surplus income During the 20th month after the
date of bankruptcy
Second time bankrupt entitled to an
Automatic Discharge
No surplus income, no
opposition to discharge (no
court)
During the 23rd month after the
date of bankruptcy
Opposition to discharge During the 23rd month after the
date of bankruptcy
Surplus income During the 35th month after the
date of bankruptcy
Other bankrupt, including a tax
debtor
Not less than 10 and not more
than 60 days before the hearing of
the discharge application

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 215
This report must be sent to:
 creditors requesting it on their proof of claim form;
 the OSB;
 the court (if applicable); and
 the bankrupt.
The report must include:
 Trustee’s comments on the causes of bankruptcy;
 information on the bankrupt’s conduct;
 other facts, circumstances or factors that should be considered by the court; and
 resolution of inspectors approving the report, or (as the case may be) the areas where
the inspectors are in disagreement and the reasons therefor.
Although it is not provided for in section 170 of the BIA (and not binding on the court), it is
customary for the Trustee to provide a recommendation on the type of discharge that might
be appropriate in the circumstances.
The bankrupt has a right to oppose statements in the report by giving written notice to the
Trustee prior to the hearing specifying the statements that are in dispute.
14.3.5. Mediation
BIA s. 170.1
BIA Rule 105, Forms 61, 62 and 63
This module will cover mediation relating to the discharge of a bankrupt. See Module 12 for
mediation relating to the requirement to pay under BIA s. 68.
Mediation must be held where the Trustee opposes the discharge of the bankrupt based on:
 failure of the bankrupt to comply with requirement to pay for first or second-time
bankrupts; or
 failure of the bankrupt to make a proposal where the bankrupt could have made a viable
proposal.
A discharge must be heard by the court and therefore mediation is not an option if:
 dealing with a third-time or more bankrupt;
 required counselling sessions have not been held; or
 discharge has been opposed on grounds other than unpaid surplus income payment
requirements.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 216
The bankrupt, Trustee, creditors and their representatives may all be part of the mediation
process.
A representative of the OSB will act as mediator and notify the parties involved of the date of
the mediation. If someone is unable to attend in person, he can attend by phone. When
mediation is successful, all the parties sign the mediated agreement and that becomes the
bankrupt’s conditional order of discharge. If the mediation is unsuccessful, the parties will
proceed to court to have the matter of the discharge determined at a discharge hearing. In
practice, different regions deal with mediation in a streamlined fashion such as by email.
Check with your local OSB office for their required procedures.
These are the time frames for dealing with mediation:

Time frame BIA action Responsibility
Prior to expiration of 21 or 36
months
File opposition Trustee or creditor
Within 5 days after the day on
which the bankrupt would have
been automatically discharged
Request mediation Trustee
Within 45 days of the request OSB will schedule
mediation date and
time / expedited
mediation will take
place between the
bankrupt and the
trustee
OSB-mediator or trustee
15 days prior to mediation Notify all relevant
parties
OSB-mediator
Upon successful completion of
mediated agreement
Issue Form 84,
Certificate of
Discharge
Trustee

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 217
14.4. Bankrupt’s discharge
14.4.1. First time bankrupt
BIA s. 168.1(1)
The BIA provides that a first time bankrupt is eligible for an automatic discharge nine months
after the date of the bankruptcy if there is no surplus income or twenty-one months if there is
surplus income. The effect of the automatic discharge is the same as if the bankrupt had
received an absolute order of discharge from the court.
The bankrupt is ineligible for an automatic discharge and an actual discharge application
must be made to court if:
 an objection to the discharge is filed prior to the expiration of the nine months (or twentyone months if there is surplus income) by either the OSB, creditors or the Trustee; or
 the bankrupt has not attended the required counselling sessions.
14.4.2. Facts for which a discharge may be refused, suspended or granted
conditionally
BIA s. 173(1)
The BIA outlines facts for which a discharge may be refused, suspended or granted
conditionally. If one of the facts listed below is proven, the court cannot order an absolute
order of discharge.
A creditor who wishes to oppose the discharge of a bankrupt must send notice of his
opposition along with the grounds therefor to:
 the OSB;
 the bankrupt; and
 the Trustee.
A court fee must accompany the creditor opposition. The amount of the fee varies by
province.
Some of the more commonly used grounds for opposition can be summarized as follows:
 Assets of the debtor are not of a value equal to fifty cents on the dollar.
 The bankrupt continued to do business while knowing himself to be insolvent.
 The bankrupt has failed to adequately account for loss or deficiency of assets.
 The bankrupt brought on or contributed to the bankruptcy by rash and hazardous
speculations, unjustifiable extravagance in living or gambling.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 218
 The bankrupt has on a previous occasion made a bankruptcy or a proposal to creditors.
 The bankrupt has failed to comply with a requirement to pay under BIA s.68.
 The bankrupt has failed to perform duties imposed on him by the BIA.
A complete list of the grounds for opposition can be found under s. 173 of the BIA.
Farmers are exempt from paragraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of BIA s. 173. Their discharge cannot be
opposed if the only grounds for opposition are that they have not kept adequate books and
records for the three years prior to bankruptcy or that they continued to trade after becoming
aware of being insolvent.
14.4.3. Court application for discharge
The court has the authority to determine whether or not a bankrupt qualifies for a discharge
from bankruptcy. An application to court for the discharge of a bankrupt occurs when:
 an individual is not eligible for an automatic discharge; or
 a bankrupt requires a discharge sooner than the automatic discharge date and waives his
right to an automatic discharge.
The timelines required for making the court application are as follows:
Action Deadline
(Time prior to hearing unless
otherwise specified)
Responsibility
Notify the bankrupt of
application to court for
hearing date
Before the Trustee’s discharge and not
earlier than 3 months and not later than
12 months after the date of bankruptcy
Trustee
Set hearing date Usually within 30 days of the Trustee’s
request for a hearing, but may be
flexible if requested by the Trustee or
the bankrupt.10
Court
Notify creditors/
bankrupt/ OSB of the
hearing
At least 15 days Trustee
Submit Trustee’s BIA
s.170 Report
OSB/ bankrupt/ creditors who
requested a copy: at least 10 days
Trustee

10 In practice, the date is set by the court based on availability

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 219
Court: at least 2 days

The court will read the Trustee’s BIA s. 170 report and hear from the Trustee, the bankrupt
and any other party who has appeared. Unless a creditor has filed an opposition prior to the
hearing, the creditor will not have a voice at the hearing.
The court will make one of the following orders:
 Absolute Order of Discharge;
 Order Suspending Discharge;
 Order Setting Conditions for Discharge; or
 Order Refusing Discharge.
The court may also adjourn the hearing until additional information is obtained or grant no
order and the Trustee can proceed to close the estate.
If the bankrupt is not satisfied with the court order, he has the opportunity to appeal the order
within 10 days. Otherwise, an application to vary the order cannot occur until one year has
passed from the granting of the order.
An application to vary the order is not an automatic right. The court will only entertain such a
request if more than one year has elapsed, and if the bankrupt can demonstrate that he has
tried to comply with the terms of discharge, but there is no reasonable expectation that he will
be able to comply with the terms of the order. In such a case, the court has discretion (but no
obligation) to modify the terms of discharge.
14.4.4. Absolute discharge
BIA s. 178
An absolute order of discharge releases a debtor from all unsecured debts except for those
listed under BIA s. 178. As a result, the debtor is released from all financial obligations to the
bankruptcy estate creditors.
Once a bankrupt has received an automatic or absolute discharge, any assets that the
bankrupt becomes entitled to after the date of discharge, including inheritance and lottery
winnings are protected from pre-bankruptcy creditors other than the debts that survive due to
the application of section 178 of the BIA.
14.4.5. Suspended discharge
A suspended order of discharge suspends the effective date of the absolute discharge to a
future date. On the effective date, the bankrupt is absolutely discharged.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 220
There is no further requirement to pay surplus income to the Trustee during the time of
suspension unless so ordered by the court. The Trustee has the power to seize any afteracquired assets for the benefit of creditors until the date of the actual discharge.
14.4.6. Conditional discharge
A conditional order of discharge imposes a condition on the bankrupt that must be complied
with before the absolute order will be granted. The most common condition is that the
bankrupt pay a certain amount of money to the Trustee for the general benefit of the
creditors. Once the bankrupt has satisfied the terms of the conditional order, the bankrupt is
entitled to an absolute order of discharge. The Trustee will file a report to the court advising
that the conditions have been met and an absolute order of discharge is granted.
The debts of the bankrupt will not be discharged until the bankrupt has received an absolute
order of discharge.
The bankrupt can also consent to a judgement for the amount on the conditional order and
receive an absolute discharge immediately. Pursuant to s. 180 of the BIA, should the
bankrupt default on the terms of the judgement, the Trustee could apply to the court to have
the discharge annulled.
14.4.7. Refused discharge
The court may refuse to grant a bankrupt a discharge. The bankrupt can appeal the order.
Once a discharge is refused the Trustee would likely proceed to his discharge which would
effectively lift the stay of proceedings, which was put in place at the date of the assignment.
This would revive the ability of the creditors to pursue their debts.
Some instances where a court may refuse to grant a discharge would be as follows:
 third time or more bankruptcy;
 bankrupt displayed flagrant and callous disregard for the rights of creditors;
 bankrupt was uncooperative, evasive, untruthful and fraudulently disposed of assets;
 bankrupt completely ignored his duties and responsibilities and took a casual attitude
toward bankruptcy; and/or
 bankrupt lacked proper respect for his obligations to creditors and the Trustee and
disposed of assets.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 221
14.5. Proposal only
14.5.1. Compliance of Division I and consumer proposal
Form 46
The Trustee or Administrator of a proposal is responsible for ensuring that the terms of the
proposal have been satisfactorily completed. Once completed, the Trustee must issue a
Certificate of Full Performance and forward a copy of it to the OSB and the debtor. The
Certificate of Full Performance has the same effect as a discharge from bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 222
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
15. Administer Division I Proposal

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 223
Table of Contents
15. ADMINISTER DIVISION I PROPOSAL ... 222
15.1. Introduction ... 224
15.2. Acceptance of a proposal by the creditors ... 224
15.2.1. Meeting of creditors ... 224
15.3. Approval by the court ... 224
15.3.1. Procedure ... 224
15.3.2. Factors that the court considers before approving the proposal ... 225
15.4. Refusal/default of the proposal... 225
15.4.1. Refusal of the proposal ... 225
15.4.2. Annulment of proposal ... 226
15.4.3. Default in performance of the proposal ... 226
15.4.4. Annulment order ... 226
15.4.5. Effect of annulling a proposal ... 227
15.5. Amendments ... 227
15.5.1. Amendments at the first meeting ... 227
15.5.2. Court approval of amended proposals ... 227
15.6. Bankruptcy assignments ... 227
15.6.1. Bankrupt filing a proposal ... 227
15.6.2. Refusal, non-approval or default of proposal by a bankrupt ... 228

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 224
15.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Describe in detail the acceptance of proposals by both creditors and the court.
 Explain what happens when a proposal is not accepted by the creditors, or there is a
default.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 54(1), 57-59 and 61-63
 BIA Forms 38, 39, 40, 40.1, 41, 43, 43.1, and 43.2
 BIA Rule 92
 Directive 24
15.2. Acceptance of a proposal by the creditors
15.2.1. Meeting of creditors
Voting on the proposal is held at the first meeting of creditors, which must be held within 21
days after the filing of the proposal unless the court extends the delay.
It is not necessary for creditors to be present in person or by proxy as long as they have
proven their claim and filed a voting letter with the Trustee.
To be accepted by creditors, a majority in number and 2/3 in dollar value of each class of
creditors must accept the proposal.
15.3. Approval by the court
15.3.1. Procedure
BIA s. 58
BIA Forms 40 and 40.1
Once the proposal has been accepted by the creditors, the Trustee will:
 apply to court for a hearing for the application of the court approval within five days after
the acceptance;
 send a notice of the hearing at least 15 days before the date of the hearing to:
 the insolvent person;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 225
 every proven creditor; and
 the Official Receiver;
 complete and forward a copy of the report of the Trustee on the proposal to the Official
Receiver at least 10 days before the date of the hearing; and
 send a copy of the report to the court at least two days before the hearing.
15.3.2. Factors that the court considers before approving the proposal
Even though the Trustee has recommended the proposal and the creditors have approved it,
there is no guarantee that the court will approve the proposal. The court will only approve the
proposal if the court believes it is reasonable in the circumstances. Factors that the court
takes into consideration are:
 the interests of the debtor in making a settlement with his creditors;
 the interests of the creditors in procuring a settlement that is reasonable and does not
prejudice their rights;
 the interests of the public to preserve the integrity of the bankruptcy process; and
 if it is established that the debtor has committed any one of the offences mentioned in
sections 198 to 200 of the BIA.
15.4. Refusal/default of the proposal
15.4.1. Refusal of the proposal
BIA s. 57
BIA Forms 38, 39 and 73
If the creditors refuse to accept the proposal, the insolvent person is deemed to have made
an assignment into bankruptcy as of the date of the meeting.
If there is a quorum present the Trustee may hold the first meeting of creditors in the
bankruptcy right then and there. However, if no quorum is present, the Trustee, within five
days, must send notice calling a meeting of creditors, which meeting must be held within 21
days (unless the delay is extended by the Official Receiver or by the court, as is permitted
under sections 102 and 187 of the BIA).
The Trustee will file a report with the Official Receiver immediately after the meeting of
creditors held in the proposal is over, and the Official Receiver will then issue a Certificate of
Assignment.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 226
15.4.2. Annulment of proposal
BIA s. 63(1) and (3)
The court may annul a proposal in four different scenarios, namely when:
 default is made in the performance of any provision of the proposal;
 it appears to the court that the proposal cannot continue without injustice or undue delay;
 it appears to the court that the approval of the proposal was obtained by fraud; or
 after approval of the proposal, the debtor has been convicted of an offence.
Default under a proposal does not necessarily annul it. In order for the actual annulment to
occur, a court order is necessary.
15.4.3. Default in performance of the proposal
BIA s. 62.1
BIA Form 43.1
BIA Rule 93
The Trustee must inform all creditors and the Official Receiver by notice:
 when a default is made in the performance of any proposal and the default is not
remedied by the insolvent person within 30 days; and
 when the default is not waived by the inspectors (or by the creditors).
The Trustee must advise the creditors of the default if the above conditions occur, but is not
obligated to ask for an order annulling the proposal. After the proposal has been declared in
default, however, any interested party could ask the court to annul the proposal.
At this point, if the Trustee should choose not to have the proposal annulled, the Trustee can
proceed to his discharge leaving the insolvent person without protection of the BIA.
15.4.4. Annulment order
In a proposal by an insolvent person, the effect of the annulment order is that the debtor is
deemed to have made an assignment into bankruptcy as of the date of that order.
The Trustee must then file a copy of the order with the Official Receiver who will issue a
Certificate of Assignment. The Trustee is required, within 5 days, to call a meeting of
creditors.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 227
15.4.5. Effect of annulling a proposal
An order annulling a proposal does not affect the validity of any sale, disposition of property
or payment duly made or anything else done under the terms of the proposal.
Where a proposal has been annulled, any funds in the hands of the Trustee are considered
funds of the proposal and are paid to the proposal creditors less the Trustee’s fees and
disbursements.
15.5. Amendments
15.5.1. Amendments at the first meeting
The power to make alterations and amendments at the first meeting of creditors is very
broad. Circumstances do change from the time of filing the proposal to the meeting of
creditors and the amendments can be voted upon as long as the insolvent person is in
agreement.
If creditors have voted for the acceptance of the proposal by voting letter, then these letters
can only be used to vote for an amendment if it is to the betterment of the proposal, i.e., more
money, or sooner, or better guarantees, etc. If the proposal has changed dramatically, it may
be in the best interests of all parties that the meeting be adjourned and that the Trustee call a
new meeting. In that case, the amended proposal can be sent to all creditors along with new
voting letters within an appropriate amount of time for the creditors to review the amended
proposal.
There is no provision under the BIA for an amendment to a Division I proposal once accepted
at the first meeting of creditors. If, after acceptance, a Division I proposal is amended, it is, in
effect, a new proposal.
15.5.2. Court approval of amended proposals
BIA Rule 92
During an application for approval of a proposal, the court has limited powers to make any
alterations or amendments. The BIA states that, when approving a proposal, the court may
correct any errors or omissions that do not constitute an alternation of substance.
15.6. Bankruptcy assignments
15.6.1. Bankrupt filing a proposal
BIA s. 61(1)
A bankrupt has the ability to file a Division I proposal, provided however that the inspectors of
the estate must approve the proposal before it is filed with the Trustee. The approval of a

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 228
Division I proposal by the court made after bankruptcy serves to annul the bankruptcy and revest in the debtor the right, title and interest of his property.
15.6.2. Refusal, non-approval or default of proposal by a bankrupt
The effect of the refusal by creditors or non-approval by the court is that the bankrupt
remains bankrupt and the assets remain vested in the Trustee. The effect of an annulment of
the proposal is that the debtor is deemed to have made an assignment. The Trustee must
inform the Official Receiver, who shall then issue a Certificate of Appointment.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 229
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
16. Administer Consumer Proposal

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 230
Table of Contents
16. ADMINISTER CONSUMER PROPOSAL ... 229
16.1. Introduction ... 232
16.2. Deemed acceptance of a proposal by the creditors ... 232
16.2.1. Creditors may indicate assent or dissent ... 232
16.2.2. Calling of a meeting of creditors ... 232
16.2.3. Deemed acceptance ... 233
16.3. Approval by the court ... 233
16.3.1. Request for an application ... 233
16.3.2. Procedure for application ... 233
16.3.3. Court application ... 233
16.3.4. Deemed approval ... 234
16.4. Completion of the proposal ... 234
16.4.1. Administration ... 234
16.4.2. Payments and deposit of monies ... 234
16.4.3. Certificate of Full Performance ... 234
16.5. Default of the proposal ... 235
16.5.1. Deemed annulment ... 235
16.5.2. Court annulment of consumer proposal ... 235
16.5.3. Notification of annulment ... 235
16.5.4. Validity of actions during term of proposal ... 235
16.5.5. Effects of annulment ... 236
16.5.6. Automatic revival ... 236
16.5.7. Application to court for revival ... 236
16.5.8. Withdrawal of consumer proposal ... 237

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 231
16.6. Amendment to consumer proposal ... 237
16.6.1. Amendment ... 237
16.7. Bankruptcy assignments ... 237
16.7.1. Consumer proposal filed by a bankrupt ... 237
16.7.2. The effect of annulment ... 238

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 232
16.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Describe in detail the acceptance of proposals by both creditors and the court.
 Explain what happens when a proposal is not accepted by the creditors, or there is a
default.
Certain processes and procedures may be identical for both Division I and consumer
proposals and will be discussed in this module. Similarities in the consumer proposal module
will refer back to Module 15.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 66.15-66.33, 66.37, 66.38, 66.4 and 69.2
 BIA Forms 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 51.1, 52, 53, 53.1, 54, 54.1 and 56
16.2. Deemed acceptance of a proposal by the creditors
16.2.1. Creditors may indicate assent or dissent
BIA s. 66.17(1)
Any creditor who has proved a claim with the Administrator in the proposal may indicate
either assent to or dissent from the proposal. In order for their vote to be counted this
decision must be made:
 before the expiration of the 45 day period following the filing of the consumer proposal; or
 at or prior to the first meeting of creditors, if one is called.
Also, in order for the vote of a creditor to be counted, there must be a requirement to hold a
meeting of creditors (as described below). Even if all of the creditors vote against a consumer
proposal, it will be deemed approved by the creditors if they did not also request a meeting.
16.2.2. Calling of a meeting of creditors
BIA s. 66.15(1) and 66.17(2)
There are two situations where the Administrator must call a meeting of creditors to discuss
the proposal:
 if directed by the Official Receiver; or

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 233
 if, at the expiration of the 45-day period following the filing of the consumer proposal,
creditors having an aggregate of at least 25% of the value of proven claims have
requested that a meeting be held.
16.2.3. Deemed acceptance
BIA s. 66.18(1-2)
As mentioned above, if there has been no request to call a meeting of creditors at the end of
the 45 days, the consumer proposal is deemed to have been accepted by the creditors.
Also, if a meeting has been called but there is no quorum, the consumer proposal is deemed
to be accepted.
16.3. Approval by the court
16.3.1. Request for an application
BIA s. 66.22(1)
If the Administrator receives a request to make an application to court from either the Official
Receiver or an interested party within 15 days from the acceptance or deemed acceptance of
the proposal, he must do so immediately.
16.3.2. Procedure for application
Where an Administrator is required to make an application, he must:
 send a notice of the hearing at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing to:
 the consumer debtor;
 every proven creditor; and
 the Official Receiver;
 file a report with the court at least two days before the date of the hearing on the
consumer proposal and the conduct of the debtor; and
 forward a copy of the report to the Official Receiver at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing.
16.3.3. Court application
BIA s. 66.24(1)
If a court application is required, the court must hear any of the following;
 the Official Receiver;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 234
 the Administrator;
 the consumer debtor;
 any opposing, objecting or dissenting creditor;
 any other interesting party; and
 any further evidence as the court may require
before making a decision on the proposal.
16.3.4. Deemed approval
BIA s. 66.22(2)
If the Administrator does not receive a request for an application to court within 15 days after
the acceptance or deemed acceptance, the consumer proposal is deemed to have been
approved by the court.
16.4. Completion of the proposal
16.4.1. Administration
Once the creditors and the court have approved the consumer proposal, it is the insolvent
person’s responsibility to meet the terms of the proposal.
The Administrator has a responsibility to ensure the terms of the proposal are being met
regarding the insolvent debtor’s payments and any distribution of funds.
16.4.2. Payments and deposit of monies
BIA s. 66.26
All funds payable under the consumer proposal must be paid to the Administrator. After the
payment of all fees and expenses, the Administrator must distribute the available monies to
creditors in accordance with the terms of the proposal.
The BIA allows the Administrator, with the approval of the Superintendent, to deposit all
monies relating to the administration of consumer proposals in a single consolidated trust
account. This is similar to the consolidated bank accounts operated in summary bankruptcy
administrations.
16.4.3. Certificate of Full Performance
BIA s. 66.38
Once the insolvent person has met all of the terms of the proposal, the Administrator will
issue a Certificate of Full Performance to the debtor and to the Official Receiver.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 235
16.5. Default of the proposal
16.5.1. Deemed annulment
BIA s. 66.31(1)
A consumer proposal is deemed to be annulled:
 In the case when payments are to be made monthly or more frequently, the day on which
the debtor is in default for an amount equivalent to at last payments.
 In the case when payments are to be made less frequently than monthly, the day that is
three months after the day on which the debtor was in default of any payment.
16.5.2. Court annulment of consumer proposal
BIA s. 66.3(1)
The court also has discretion to annul the proposal when:
 the proposal is in default;
 the debtor was not eligible to make a consumer proposal when the consumer proposal
was filed;
 the consumer proposal cannot continue without injustice or undue delay; or
 approval of the court was obtained by fraud.
This is not done of the court’s own initiative, but rather on application by an interested party,
and on such notice as the court may direct.
16.5.3. Notification of annulment
BIA s. 66.3(4) and 66.31(1)
BIA Forms 53, 53.1 and 56
When a court annulment or a deemed annulment has occurred, the Administrator has a duty
to immediately inform creditors of the annulment and file a report in prescribed form with the
Official Receiver.
16.5.4. Validity of actions during term of proposal
BIA s. 66.3(2) and 66.31(3)
An annulment or deemed annulment of a consumer proposal does not affect the validity of
any sale, disposition of property or payment duly made or anything duly performed during the
term of the consumer proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 236
16.5.5. Effects of annulment
BIA s. 69.2
Where a consumer proposal has been annulled or deemed annulled, the consumer debtor:
 cannot make another consumer proposal without leave of the court; and
 will not be entitled to any relief provided by Section 69.2 of the BIA
until all claims of the proven creditors have either been paid in full or extinguished by the
operation of sub-section 178(2).
Also, the rights of creditors are revived for the amounts of the claim, less any dividends
received once the consumer proposal is annulled or deemed annulled.
16.5.6. Automatic revival
BIA s. 66.31(7)
In the case of a deemed annulment of a consumer proposal made by a person other than a
bankrupt, notice is sent to the Official Receiver and the creditors. The Administrator may, if
deemed appropriate, with notice to the Official Receiver, send a notice to all creditors, within
30 days after the date of the deemed annulment, informing them that the consumer proposal
will be automatically revived 60 days after the day on which it was deemed to be annulled,
unless an objection is received.
If the notice is sent and no notice of objection is filed the proposal is automatically revived on
the expiry of 60 days from the date of deemed annulment.
If a notice of objection is filed prior to the expiration of 60 days the Administrator is to send,
without delay, a notice to the Official Receiver and to each creditor informing them that the
consumer proposal is not going to be automatically revived.
At the date of the automatic revival the proposal cannot still be in default. For example, if on
March 1st the debtor was three months in default and May 1st is the automatic revival date,
the debtor has to make up one of the defaulted upon payments in addition to maintaining the
April and May payments so that, at the 60th day, the proposal is not three months in default
again.
16.5.7. Application to court for revival
BIA s. 66.31(9)
The Administrator may, at any time, apply to the court, with notice to the Official Receiver and
the creditors, for an order reviving any consumer proposal of a consumer debtor who is not
bankrupt that was deemed to be annulled. If the court considers it appropriate to do so, it
may make an order reviving the consumer proposal on any terms the court considers
appropriate.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 237
After a consumer proposal is revived, the Administrator must, without delay, file a report with
the Official Receiver in relation to the revival and send a notice to the creditors informing
them of the revival.
16.5.8. Withdrawal of consumer proposal
BIA s. 66.25
The BIA gives the consumer debtor the ability to withdraw a consumer proposal:
 any time before its deemed approval by the court where no court review is requested; or
 when a court review is requested, at any time before the actual approval or refusal by the
court.
There is a consequence for the debtor of withdrawing a consumer proposal, so this step
should not be taken lightly. The consequence is that if another consumer proposal is filed
within the next 6 months following the withdrawal, the debtor will not benefit from a stay of
proceedings.
16.6. Amendment to consumer proposal
16.6.1. Amendment
BIA s. 66.37
In certain situations consumer proposals may be amended. The amended proposal must
include the same procedural provisions stipulated in BIA s. 66.37 as in the original proposal.
As is the case for a withdrawal of a consumer proposal, there could be consequences to an
amendment, so the step should not be taken lightly. If an amendment is filed within 6 months
of a previous amendment, the stay of proceedings will terminate.
16.7. Bankruptcy assignments
16.7.1. Consumer proposal filed by a bankrupt
BIA s. 66.4(2)
When a bankrupt wishes to file a consumer proposal, the following conditions are required:
 the consumer proposal must be approved by any inspectors of the bankrupt estate; and
 the consumer debtor must obtain the assistance of a Trustee who will act as
Administrator in the proposal. In most, but not all, cases the debtor would seek the
assistance of his current Trustee in order to file a proposal.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 238
All creditors must prove their claims as at the date of the bankruptcy, rather than the date of
the consumer proposal.
The approval or deemed approval by the court of the consumer proposal annuls the
bankruptcy and re-vests all the rights, title and interest to any of the property back to the
formerly bankrupt consumer debtor.
16.7.2. The effect of annulment
BIA s. 66.3(5)
When a consumer proposal made by a bankrupt is annulled, the consumer debtor is deemed
to have made a new assignment into bankruptcy.
The Trustee must:
 send notice of the meeting of creditors under Section 102 within five days;
 affirm the appointment of the Trustee or appoint another Trustee in lieu at the meeting of
creditors; and
 file a report with the Official Receiver who will issue a Certificate of Assignment in
prescribed form.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 239
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
17. Monitor File; Ensure Completeness; Organize &
Close File

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 240
Table of Contents
17. MONITOR FILE; ENSURE COMPLETENESS; ORGANIZE & CLOSE FILE
 ... 239
17.1. Introduction ... 242
17.2. Mechanism to track status of the administration of the file ... 242
17.2.1. Different methods ... 242
17.3. Bankruptcy ... 243
17.3.1. Debtor’s income ... 243
17.3.2. Third parties ... 243
17.4. Proposal ... 244
17.4.1. Monthly payments ... 244
17.5. Counselling sessions ... 244
17.5.1. Non-compliance in a bankruptcy: ... 244
17.5.2. Non-compliance in a consumer proposal: ... 244
17.6. Handling of trust funds ... 245
17.6.1. Property held in trust... 245
17.6.2. Rules ... 245
17.6.3. Record keeping ... 245
17.7. Banking / trust accounts ... 245
17.7.1. Maintaining trust accounts ... 245
17.7.2. Withdrawal of funds from trust accounts ... 246
17.7.3. General... 247
17.7.4. Third party deposit ... 247
17.7.5. Consolidated trust account ... 248
17.7.6. Banking and accounting records ... 248

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 241
17.7.7. Fees and expenses of Trustee – Division I Proposal ... 249
17.7.8. Fees and expenses of Administrator – Consumer Proposal... 249
17.7.9. Access to banking and accounting information ... 249
17.8. Undistributed funds and unpaid dividends ... 250
17.8.1. Unrealized assets ... 250
17.8.2. Undistributed funds / immaterial amounts ... 250
17.8.3. Additional interest ... 250
17.8.4. Unclaimed dividends... 251
17.8.5. Undistributed funds ... 251
17.9. Follow-up items ... 251
17.9.1. Summary and ordinary administration for an individual ... 251
17.9.2. Ordinary administration - corporate ... 252
17.9.3. Consumer proposal ... 252
17.9.4. Division I proposal ... 252
17.9.5. Ordinary administration disbursements ... 252
17.10. WEPPA ... 254

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 242
17.1. Introduction
Module objectives
At the end of this module, you will be able to:
 Review a file to determine completeness.
 Ensure the file is properly organized.
 Determine steps required to close the file.
Assigned reading
 BIA s. 15, 25, 26, 27, 39 (3), 40, 62.1, 62.1(c), 63(1), 66.12 (6) (b), 66.26 (2) (3), 66.31(1),
68 (1), 120 (3), 154, 155 (g), 157.1(3), 168.1(1)(f), 170(1) and 197
 BIA Form 4
 BIA Rules 18 - 27, 93(a)&(b), 48, 61(2)(e), 101(1), 128 and 129
 Directives 1R, 5R, 7, 18 and 27R
 CAIRP Rules of Professional Conduct No. 4 and 7; CAIRP Standard of Professional
Practice No. 16
17.2. Mechanism to track status of the administration of the file
17.2.1. Different methods
It is important to use an accurate, consistent method of tracking and follow-up on the status
of the administration of the bankruptcy or proposal. You should review with the Trustee the
standard practice for your office. Ensure that time lines are met and that the estate is
administered in a timely fashion.
1. Notes kept in file
Notes of all telephone conversations, emails, decisions made and reasons therefore
should be documented in the estate file and should be reviewed to ensure that nothing is
overlooked. These will provide evidence should problems arise.
2. Software program
Depending on the software your office uses there may be a feature within this program
which will allow you to enter follow-up notes on an individual estate. Programs such as
Uberbase or Ascend allow you to enter notes and follow-up required date, which can be
reviewed on a daily basis to ensure that follow-up items are dealt with in a timely manner.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 243
17.3. Bankruptcy
17.3.1. Debtor’s income
BIA s. 170(1)
Prior to the bankrupt’s discharge, it is necessary:
 to review income on a monthly basis to ensure that surplus income payments, if required,
are being made;
 should a bankrupt have a material change (or loss) of employment, this should be
reviewed to determine whether there should be a change to surplus income payments
being made; and
 if the bankrupt has not met the surplus income payments required or has not honoured
the agreement for the payment of the Trustee’s fees, an objection to discharge should be
filed.
17.3.2. Third parties
BIA s. 197
BIA Rules 18 - 26
If outside services were commissioned on an estate (e.g., counselling services, legal
services, appraiser, auctioneer, etc.), your review should include (but is not limited to) the
following:
 Review the invoice to ensure that it is reasonable and correct.
 Review a solicitor’s bill of costs to see if it should be approved by the inspector (if
applicable) and taxed by the court.
 If utilities were put in the name of the Trustee, ensure that the appropriate letters have
been sent to stop the service and a final reading and bill have been submitted by the
utility.
 Ensure that all invoices have been received, paid and the cheques have cleared the bank
prior to closing the file.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 244
17.4. Proposal
17.4.1. Monthly payments
BIA s. 62.1, 63(1), 66(3) and 66.31(1)
BIA Form 43, 43.1
BIA Rule 93
When monitoring a proposal, you should ensure that:
 payments are being made as per the terms of the proposal;
 if the debtor is in default by two payments in a consumer proposal, the debtor has been
contacted to remind him that, in the event of the third payment being in default, the
proposal will be deemed to be annulled;
 where the debtor defaults in any of the terms of a Division I proposal, the default must be
waived by the inspectors or creditors or remedied within 30 days;
 if a default in a Division I Proposal is not waived by the inspectors or creditors and not
remedied within 30 days, the Trustee must notify the OSB and the creditors within 30
days after the expiry of the 30 day period for remedying the default. There is no deemed
assignment in bankruptcy unless the Trustee or a creditor brings an application to the
court to annul the proposal; and
 the Certificate of Full Performance is issued once the proposal has been performed in its
entirety.
17.5. Counselling sessions
17.5.1. Non-compliance in a bankruptcy:
BIA s 66.38(2) and 157.1(3)
Directive 1R
Should a bankrupt neglect or refuse to attend counselling sessions as outlined in the BIA and
the Superintendent’s Directive 1R, the bankrupt is not entitled to an automatic discharge.
17.5.2. Non-compliance in a consumer proposal:
A consumer debtor who refuses or neglects to attend the requisite counselling sessions is not
entitled to receive a Certificate of Full Performance when the terms of the proposal have
been met.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 245
17.6. Handling of trust funds
17.6.1. Property held in trust
BIA s. 25
Directive 5R
CAIRP Rule of Professional Conduct No. 7; CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 16
During the administration of an engagement, a licensed Trustee in insolvency will hold money
and property of the debtor in trust for the benefit of creditors.
17.6.2. Rules
The BIA, including the General Rules and Directives, the CAIRP Rules of Professional
Conduct, and the CAIRP Standards of Professional Practice, collectively provide rules and
guidelines in connection with the control, custody and investment of funds and property held
by a Trustee or receiver for the benefit of others.
17.6.3. Record keeping
BIA s. 26
BIA Rule 48
A Licensed Insolvency Trustee is required to hold and administer the money or other trust
property with due care in accordance with the laws, regulations and terms applicable to the
trust. The Licensed Insolvency Trustee is also required to maintain adequate records to
properly account for trust funds under his control.
17.7. Banking / trust accounts
17.7.1. Maintaining trust accounts
BIA s. 25, 27, and 120(3)
Directive 5R
CAIRP Rule of Professional Conduct No. 4
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 16
A Trustee is required to deposit all receipts of an estate into a separate trust account for each
estate. All funds received from third parties to guarantee the Trustee’s fees and expenses
must be deposited to a separate trust account maintained specifically for third party funds.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 246
The summary administration provisions allow the Trustee, with the approval of the Division
Assistant Superintendent, to operate a consolidated bank account for all estates under
summary administration.
The Trustee is prohibited from depositing estate funds into his general operating account or a
personal account.
The Trustee is required to open estate trust accounts only in deposit-taking institutions where
deposits are insured by Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation or provincial insurance
corporations against loss of money on deposit with that institution.
The Trustee is required to keep proper books and records that sufficiently account for the
receipt and disposition of all estate funds.
The inspectors have a duty to periodically examine the Trustee’s accounts and verify the
bank balance, to ensure the funds are used only for the intended purpose and that all
disbursements are properly made.
The Superintendent of Bankruptcy has issued directives establishing strict standards for the
operation and control of estate trust accounts, addressing in particular:
 internal control systems;
 banking and accounting records;
 treatment of estate funds;
 treatment of third party deposits;
 delegation of tasks; and
 operation of consolidated trust accounts.
The Trustee is obligated to notify the Superintendent of Bankruptcy of any changes to a
banking or accounting system.
CAIRP members are required to handle trust property and funds in accordance with the
terms of the trust and the applicable laws relating to the property or funds and to maintain the
necessary books and records to properly account for the property and funds.
17.7.2. Withdrawal of funds from trust accounts
BIA s. 25(1.3)
BIA Rule 128 and 129
Directive 27R
In an ordinary administration, the Trustee is not permitted to withdraw any funds from the
estate as an advance towards his remuneration without the written permission of the

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 247
inspectors, or a court order. The Trustee is allowed to pay disbursements in the ordinary
course of the administration of the estate.
The provisions for summary administration and Division II proposal estates stipulate the
amounts and timing of withdrawals for fees and certain administrative expenses.
17.7.3. General
BIA s. 15, 25(1) and 66.26(2)
Directive 5R
CAIRP Standard of Professional Practice No. 16
The setup and maintenance of trust accounts is identical for all appointments. The Trustee is
to maintain a separate interest-bearing trust account for each estate, except as specifically
provided for otherwise in the BIA. The account must be held in the name of the Trustee in its
particular capacity (e.g., “the Trustee in re the proposal of John Doe or Joan Smith). The only
exceptions to the rules are where:
 the service charges and related costs exceed the amount of interest earned on the funds;
or
 the Trustee holds a consolidated trust account for consumer proposals or summary
administration bankruptcies and the particular estate is one for which the accounting can
be done through the consolidated account.
An adequate internal control system must be set up for the safekeeping and day-to-day
management of the funds and the recording of receipts and disbursements. The Trustee or
an authorized representative may authorize transactions, however, only a Trustee may sign
cheques issued on any trust account.
17.7.4. Third party deposit
Directive 16
In certain proposals, a Trustee may receive a third-party deposit to secure recovery of the
administrative costs of the proposal. A written agreement must be signed between the
Trustee and the depositor to evidence the terms of the agreement. The agreement must
contain the following minimum disclosures:
 amount or method of calculation of remuneration;
 declaration by the depositor that the funds are third party and do not directly or indirectly
come from assets that belong to the debtor;
 declaration that the deposit is an indemnity for the costs of the administration;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 248
 undertaking by the Trustee to provide the depositor with a draft copy of the Statement of
Receipts and Disbursements when submitted to the Official Receiver, notify depositor of
the date and time of taxation and provide a copy of the taxed Statement of Receipts and
Disbursements when available;
 name and address of the depositor; and
 any other conditions that may be negotiated between the depositor and the Trustee.
17.7.5. Consolidated trust account
BIA s. 66.26(2)
Directive 5R
A Trustee may, subject to approval by the Superintendent of Bankruptcy, use one trust
account for all summary estate bankruptcies and one trust account for all consumer
proposals. In practice, a single consolidated account is convenient where there is a moderate
to large volume of consumer estates.
17.7.6. Banking and accounting records
BIA s. 26
BIA Rule 68(1)
Directive 5R and 7
Throughout the administration, the Trustee must maintain adequate banking and accounting
records to support all receipts and disbursements through the trust account. These records
will include, but are not limited to:
 deposit slips;
 cheques;
 supporting documents for the receipts and disbursements;
 bank statements and reconciliations; and
 correspondence respecting account set-up and closure.
In the case of a consolidated trust account, documentation supporting the interest calculation
and allocation to each estate is also required.
The banking and accounting records are part of the administrative records of the Trustee
which must be maintained for at least four years after the Trustee’s discharge.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 249

17.7.7. Fees and expenses of Trustee – Division I Proposal
BIA s. 25(1.3) and 39(3)
Directive 27R
The fees and expenses of a Trustee in a Division I proposal, as is the case for the fees and
expenses of a Trustee in a bankruptcy (ordinary administration), are not subject to a specific
tariff, but rather are the amounts that may be approved by the court.
The Trustee may not withdraw interim Trustee fees and administrative expenses in a Division
I proposal without the prior written approval of the inspectors, creditors or the court. The
remuneration in a proposal is not necessarily restricted to the 7 ½ % standard for a
bankruptcy but may be a special remuneration agreed to by the debtor or approved by the
court.
17.7.8. Fees and expenses of Administrator – Consumer Proposal
BIA s. 66.12(6)
BIA Rule 129
The amount and timing for the fees and expenses of the Administrator in a Division II
(consumer) proposal are restricted to the prescribed tariff:
 $750 payable on filing the proposal;
 $750 payable on approval or deemed approval by the court;
 20% of the distribution to the creditors payable on distribution;
 costs of counselling when completed;
 reimbursement of the filing fee;
 reimbursement of Registrar’s fee where applicable; and
 applicable federal and provincial taxes for goods and services taxes, harmonized sales
tax or provincial sales tax.
17.7.9. Access to banking and accounting information
BIA s. 26(2-3)
All banking records form part of the estate books and records which may be examined by the
Official Receiver, debtor and any creditor or agent of a creditor, subject to reasonable notice.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 250
17.8. Undistributed funds and unpaid dividends
17.8.1. Unrealized assets
BIA s. 40 and 154
BIA Rule 61(2)
When the Trustee is unable to dispose of property, or the property is of little or no value, the
property can be returned to the bankrupt. This provision eliminates any unnecessary delay in
finalizing the administration of an estate. With the permission of the inspectors, the Trustee
can apply for an order directing the disposition of the property.
17.8.2. Undistributed funds / immaterial amounts
BIA Directive 18
The Trustee is expected to distribute substantially all amounts, even relatively small sums,
except where a distribution to a large number of creditors or the amount to be distributed
make the distribution minuscule. The guidelines for determining immaterial payments are
based on the amount available for distribution and the number of creditors with proven
claims:
 one creditor – distribute if gross amount exceeds $5;
 two to five creditors – distribute if gross amount exceeds $50; and
 five or more creditors – distribute if the average dividend will exceed $10.
17.8.3. Additional interest
When additional bank interest is received after taxation of the Final Statement of Receipts
and Disbursements, the amount will be distributed to creditors if it exceeds the materiality
guidelines. If the funds are to be distributed, the Trustee will prepare a Supplementary
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements and dividend sheet. The Supplementary
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements will need to be taxed only if the Trustee claims
remuneration in connection with the mailing of the supplementary dividend.
If the funds do not exceed the materiality guidelines provided in the Directive on Unclaimed
Dividends and Undistributed Assets, the Trustee will remit the funds to the Superintendent of
Bankruptcy.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 251
17.8.4. Unclaimed dividends
BIA Directive 18
The unclaimed dividends (usually uncashed dividend cheques) must be remitted to the
Superintendent of Bankruptcy with a list of the names, last known addresses and amount
payable to each creditor.
The creditors must contact the Superintendent of Bankruptcy directly to request payment
thereafter. The Superintendent will forward the dividends directly to the creditors upon
request.
17.8.5. Undistributed funds
BIA s. 154
BIA Rule 101(1)
Directive 18
In a bankruptcy estate, if there are funds remaining after payment of all proven claims plus
the prescribed interest to the date of payment, then the remaining funds should be returned
to the bankrupt.
In a proposal, it is possible that surplus funds should be returned to the debtor, e.g., where a
disallowance of a claim becomes final after the dividend has been funded, or where interest
accumulates on uncashed dividends. The terms of the proposal must be respected and funds
that the creditors are not entitled to receive should be returned to the person who advanced
the funds (usually the debtor).
17.9. Follow-up items
17.9.1. Summary and ordinary administration for an individual
BIA s. 22
Income Tax Act s. 128, 150(1) and 150(3) and s. 782-785, 1000 (2) a) and s. 1002 of the Loi sur les
impôts (Quebec)
A review of the Statement of Affairs of the bankrupt should be conducted to ensure all assets
listed have been accounted for. These may include, but are not limited to, the following steps:
 Conduct a PPSA search to confirm/determine if there are any encumbrances registered
against any of the debtor’s assets (the RDPRM for assets located in Quebec).
 Review the estate file, to ensure that a letter(s) has been sent to the bankrupt’s banking
facility(s) to enquire as to the balance in the accounts and whether the bankrupt has any
other accounts or holdings with the bank.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 252
 Ensure that letters have been sent to any institution holding funds in an RRSP or other
investment to confirm the investment is exempt or to collapse, if not exempt, and forward
any non-exempt funds to the Trustee for the estate.
 Review file for the receipt of responses to all correspondence sent and ensure that any
funds received have been deposited to the estate bank account and taxes paid thereon if
applicable.
 If a vehicle was listed on the Statement of Affairs, review the file to confirm that any
equity over and above the exemption amount allowed has been received and deposited
to the estate account.
 If a property was listed on the Statement of Affairs, ensure that an appraisal or opinion of
value was obtained and that any equity has been realized and the funds have been
deposited to the estate bank account.
 Ensure that the pre, post and prior bankruptcy tax returns have been completed and the
notices of assessment and refunds, if any, have been received from the tax authorities.
17.9.2. Ordinary administration - corporate
Review the estate file to ensure that all assets listed on the Statement of Affairs have been
disposed of and all receipts have been recorded and deposited to the estate bank account.
The variations in the type of assets owned by a corporation are too numerous to detail here.
If you are unsure about the realization of an asset, review this with the Trustee in charge of
the estate.
17.9.3. Consumer proposal
A review of the file for a consumer proposal should be conducted on a regular basis to
ensure that the proper payments by the debtor are being made and that the debtor is not in
default. All payments received from the debtor should be deposited into the estate bank
account for the debtor’s proposal.
17.9.4. Division I proposal
A review of the file for a Division I proposal should be conducted to ensure that the terms of
the proposal are being met and that all receipts are deposited into the estate bank account. If
there are assets that are to be sold, ensure that all assets have been realized upon and the
funds have been deposited into the estate bank account.
17.9.5. Ordinary administration disbursements
BIA s. 25(1.3)
Disbursements permitted in an ordinary administration include, but are not limited to, the
following:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 253
 travel expenses;
 hotel and meals;
 long distance telephone calls;
 notices to creditors;
 photocopies;
 bank service charges;
 storage costs for the bankrupt’s records;
 filing fees paid to the Superintendent of Bankruptcy;
 solicitor’s fees;
 Trustee’s discharge fee;
 occupation rent;
 insurance on assets;
 appraisal costs;
 costs of disposing of assets;
 notice of the bankruptcy in the local paper;
 advertising costs of sale by tender; and
 all applicable sales taxes.
Disbursements which are not allowed from an estate bank account include the following:
 office equipment and furniture of the Trustee;
 telephone system;
 computer equipment;
 general costs of administration; and
 storage costs of the Trustee’s own records of the administration of the bankrupt estate.
Interim Trustee fees and applicable sales taxes cannot be drawn from an estate bank
account without prior approval of the inspectors of the estate or the court.
Final Trustee fees must be approved by the inspectors and the court before they may be
drawn from the estate bank account (together with all applicable sales taxes).
Interim and final dividends to creditors may be made with inspector approval.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 254
17.10. WEPPA
BIA s 81.3 - 81.4
Wage Earner Protection Program Act
Although they are often confused with one another, the WEPPA is not the same as section
81.3 or 81.4 of the BIA. The WEPPA and the priority rights to protect employees’ claims
found at section 81.3 and 81.4 of the BIA are meant to work in a coordinated manner. There
is some degree of interrelation between the two, which is why they are often confused with
one another. The WEPPA, or Wage Earner Protection Program Act, is a distinct law,
separate from the BIA or CCAA. It creates a safety net to protect employees who are losing
wages due to the bankruptcy or receivership of their employer.
The WEPPA allows employees to claim up to four times the maximum weekly insurable
earnings amount under the Employment Insurance Act from the federal government for
unpaid wages and vacation pay in the six months prior to their employer’s bankruptcy or
receivership, and for termination and severance pay. When the bankruptcy or receivership
was preceded by a proposal or a CCAA proceeding, the six months is extended to cover the
period that starts 6 months before the date of the proposal or initial order under the CCAA
and ends with the bankruptcy or receivership, but the relief under the WEPPA is only
available if the employer is bankrupt or in receivership.
The protection under the WEPPA aims at accomplishing three things with regards to the
employee claims, namely:
1. providing protection in the event that the superpriority provided for in the BIA is not
available because the assets are not sufficient;
2. providing protection for amounts that are not protected by the superpriority provided for in
the BIA, namely the severance or termination pay; and
3. providing faster payment to the employees, by advancing the funds even if the Trustee or
receiver is not yet ready to make distributions.
As indicated above, there is some interrelation and coordination between the provisions of
the WEPPA and the superpriority found in sections 81.3 and 81.4 of the BIA. These sections
of the BIA provide that the wage and vacation claims are secured against the employer’s
current assets (cash, accounts receivable and inventory), enjoying priority rights over all
other creditors (secured or unsecured), to a maximum of $2,000 per employee. Any claim for
termination and severance is an unsecured claim with no priority.
The Trustee and receivers have an important role to play in the coordination between the
WEPPA and the BIA. In particular, they have the responsibility under WEPPA to:
 identify workers who are owed wages;
 determine the amounts owed to workers;
 inform workers of the existence of the WEPP; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 255
 provide Service Canada and employees with information necessary to establish eligibility
for payment.
It is therefore crucial to obtain the debtor’s payroll information and liabilities very early in the
administration of a file.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 256
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
18. Administer Discharge of Trustee

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 257
Table of Contents
18. ADMINISTER DISCHARGE OF TRUSTEE ... 256
18.1. Introduction ... 259
18.2. Prepare interim Statements of Receipts & Disbursements ... 259
18.2.1. Bankruptcy ... 259
18.2.2. Proposal ... 260
18.3. Preparation of Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ... 260
18.3.1. When to proceed with Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ... 260
18.3.2. Preparing the Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ... 260
18.4. Trustee’s fees and expenses ... 261
18.4.1. Summary administration ... 261
18.4.2. Consumer proposal ... 262
18.4.3. Ordinary administration ... 262
18.4.4. Division I proposal ... 263
18.5. Levy & Dividends ... 263
18.5.1. Levy ... 263
18.5.2. Dividends ... 263
18.5.3. Order of priority for unsecured creditors... 263
18.5.4. Undistributed funds ... 264
18.5.5. Unclaimed dividends... 264
18.6. Details on the final R&D ... 264
18.6.1. Disposition of assets ... 264
18.6.2. Status of bankrupt’s discharge ... 264
18.7. OSB’s role in Trustee’s discharge ... 265
18.8. Taxation - summary administration and consumer proposals ... 265

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 258
18.8.1. No requirement for taxation ... 265
18.8.2. Requirement for taxation ... 265
18.8.3. Final dividend and discharge ... 266
18.9. Taxation – ordinary administration & Division I proposals ... 266
18.10. Trustee’s discharge ... 267
18.10.1. Ordinary administration & Division I proposal ... 267
18.10.2. Summary administration & consumer proposal ... 267

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 259
18.1. Introduction
Module objectives
Upon completion of this module, you will be able to:
 Prepare a Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements (R&D)
 Calculate the appropriate dividends
 Calculate the Trustee’s and Administrator’s fees
 Follow the procedures required in applying for taxation
 Follow the procedures required for obtaining a Trustee’s discharge.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 39(2), 40-41(1), 70, 136 – 140, 147 - 148 (3), 150-151, 152(1), 154(1), 178
 BIA Insolvency Circular No. 2R
 BIA Rules 58, 60 – 67, 96-103, 123 and 128-129
 Directives 10 and 18
Preparing the Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements is one of the final steps toward
obtaining a Trustee’s discharge. It is at this time that the Trustee must account to the
creditors, the OSB and, in some cases, the court for how the estate was administered.
18.2. Prepare interim Statements of Receipts & Disbursements
18.2.1. Bankruptcy
BIA s. 148
When there are funds in the estate in excess of the anticipated costs of the administration of
the estate, an interim dividend can be paid. It is often difficult to estimate what the cost to
complete the administration of the estate will be. Use extreme caution before paying out any
interim dividends to creditors! Once money has been disbursed to the creditors it will not
come back, and once a Trustee has accepted to act in a file he is not allowed to resign if
there is not enough money to pay his fees.
The BIA anticipates that inspectors will determine when an interim dividend should be paid.
The inspectors can apply to court and request that the court order the Trustee to pay out an
interim dividend should the Trustee refuse.
When paying dividends, the Trustee is obligated to pay a dividend to creditors who have
proven their claims. The distribution to creditors must be in accordance with the order of
priority set out in the BIA. This order of priority will be discussed later in this module.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 260
In calculating the amount available to pay dividends, the Trustee must retain such sums as
may be necessary for the costs of completing the administration of the estate and enough
funds to pay out any claims which are in dispute.
18.2.2. Proposal
Due to the length of time of many proposals, interim dividends are anticipated and the
proposal generally sets out when interim dividends will be paid. The interim dividend payout
schedule is usually one of the terms of the proposal which must be approved by the creditors
and/or the court.
All other rules and regulations in preparing interim Statements of Receipts and
Disbursements in proposals are the same as for a bankruptcy.
18.3. Preparation of Trustee’s Final Statement of Receipts and
Disbursements
18.3.1. When to proceed with Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements
Upon completion of the administration of an estate the Trustee is required to prepare a Final
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements (R&D). This occurs when the Trustee has:
 realized on all of the property of the bankrupt;
 dealt with the discharge of the bankrupt;
 reviewed and either admitted or disallowed claims filed by creditors;
 considered whether or not to send 30 day notices to those who have not filed a claim;
and
 completed the filing of all statutory returns.
In the case of a proposal, the Trustee proceeds with the final R&D upon completion of the
terms of the proposal, or (as the case may be) after the proposal has been declared in
default.
18.3.2. Preparing the Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements
BIA s. 152(1)
The BIA requires that in completing the final R&D, the Trustee must account for:
 all funds received, including interest;
 all funds disbursed;
 the Trustee’s fees and expenses;
 levy and dividends to creditors;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 261
 disposition of assets; and
 the status of bankrupt’s discharge.
It is important to include notes that would benefit the reader in understanding the
administration of the estate (e.g., why certain assets were not able to be realized upon).
If inspectors have been appointed, the Trustee must obtain inspector approval of the R&D. A
copy of the R&D must be sent to the OSB for comment. The OSB issues a letter of comment
which indicates if the Trustee is to make application to court for taxation of its fees. Taxation
is discussed in more detail further in this module.
After receiving a letter of comment which does not require taxation, the R&D, in prescribed
form, a dividend sheet, and a notice, in the prescribed form, of the Trustee’s intention to pay
a final dividend must be sent to:
 the OSB;
 every proven creditor;
 the bankrupt; and
 the court, where applicable.
18.4. Trustee’s fees and expenses
18.4.1. Summary administration
BIA Circular No. 2R
BIA Rule 128
Summary administration estates with realizable assets not exceeding the prescribed
amount
The fees of the Trustee for services performed in a summary administration are calculated on
the total receipts remaining after deducting necessary disbursements relating directly to the
realization of the property of the bankrupt and the payments to secured creditors, according
to the following percentages:
a) 100 % on the first $975 or less of receipts;
b) 35% on the portion of the receipts exceeding $975 but not exceeding $2,000; and
c) 50% on the portion of the receipts exceeding $2,000.
The Trustee is also permitted to make the following disbursements:
 OSB filing fee;
 counselling fees;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 262
 Registrar fee;
 GST on Trustee’s fees and counselling fees, as well as provincial taxes if applicable; and
 a lump sum of $100 in respect of administrative disbursements.
Summary administration bankruptcies are generally intended for files where the total receipts
will not exceed the prescribed amount. Should the actual receipts exceed the prescribed
amount, the OSB or the Trustee can request that the file be converted to an ordinary
administration. This should be considered where the Trustee has incurred considerable
disbursements in realizing on assets, etc. The Trustee also has the option of capping fees
based on the prescribed amount. The Trustee calculates fees as though only the prescribed
amount has been received in the estate even though the total receipts are higher.
18.4.2. Consumer proposal
BIA Rule 129
The Administrator’s fees in a consumer proposal are based on a tariff pursuant to the BIA.
They are as follows:
a) $750 payable on filing a copy of the consumer proposal with the Official Receiver;
b) $750 payable on the approval or deemed approval of the consumer proposal by the
court; and
c) 20% of the moneys distributed to creditors under the consumer proposal, payable on the
distribution of the moneys.
You are also permitted to claim the costs of counseling, the filing fee, any court fee, and any
applicable provincial and federal taxes on fees and the above noted disbursements.
18.4.3. Ordinary administration
BIA s. 39
The BIA outlines a tariff for ordinary administration bankruptcies of 7 ½ %. This tariff is rarely
used. Generally, the Trustee’s fees and disbursements are based on reasonable charges for
the time spent on the administration and the actual disbursements incurred.
The Trustee and staff must keep details of time spent and duties performed in administering
the estate as this will form the basis to justify fees claimed on the final R&D.
The Trustee’s fees must be approved by the:
 inspector;
 creditors; and
 court.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 263
18.4.4. Division I proposal
BIA s. 39
The terms of the Division I proposal indicate how the Trustee’s fees are to be calculated. The
fee calculation can be as unique as the proposal. It is not uncommon to see either an
estimated lump sum fee or a fee based on the actual time the Trustee spends on the file.
18.5. Levy & Dividends
18.5.1. Levy
BIA s.147
BIA Rule 123
Directive 10R
A levy must be paid to the OSB pursuant to the BIA on all dividends paid to creditors. Please
review the associated BIA section, Rule and Directive.
The levy is submitted to the OSB with the prescribed form.
18.5.2. Dividends
Upon approval of the final or interim R&D, dividends may be paid to the creditors.
When issuing dividends, the Trustee must be careful to follow the order of priority set out in
the BIA. The property of the bankrupt divisible among the creditors is subject to the rights of
secured creditors and deemed trust claims.
18.5.3. Order of priority for unsecured creditors
BIA s. 136
The BIA identifies the order in which the receipts realized in an estate are to be disbursed.
The order of distribution to creditors is often subject to many conditions. Generally, the order
of distribution is as follows:
 reasonable funeral and testamentary expenses incurred by the legal personal
representative of the deceased bankrupt;
 the cost of the administration as outlined in the BIA;
 the levy payable under the BIA;
 preferred creditors in the order and subject to the conditions outlined in the BIA;
 unsecured creditors on a pro-rata basis; and

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 264
 excess funds go to shareholders or the bankrupt after payment of interest as provided for
in s. 143 of the BIA.
18.5.4. Undistributed funds
Directive 18
A Trustee is expected to pay out a dividend to creditors even if the amount is very small as
indicated in Module 17.
18.5.5. Unclaimed dividends
BIA s. 154(1)
Directive 18
In order to proceed with the Trustee’s discharge, the estate trust account must have a NIL
balance.
Pursuant to the BIA, a Trustee who cannot locate a creditor, or who is unsuccessful in getting
the dividend cashed, can forward the funds to the OSB as an unclaimed divided.
The BIA outlines procedures to be followed by a Trustee to limit the number of unclaimed
dividends and to assist the OSB in returning the dividend to a creditor when it is later
claimed. The requirements of a Trustee to assist with this are:
 allow a longer period of time for cashing dividend cheques (30 to 45 days is suggested);
 make a reasonable effort to locate a current address for the creditor; and
 when forwarding funds to the OSB include any reference numbers found on the proof of
claim to assist with tracing the dividend.
18.6. Details on the final R&D
18.6.1. Disposition of assets
In a bankruptcy, notes accounting for all of the assets listed on the Statement of Affairs must
be made on the final R&D. Explain the disposition of each asset (whether the Trustee was
able to realize on the assets or not). If the asset was sold, the amount realized as well as all
costs related to the sale should also be indicated if applicable.
If the asset was released to the secured creditor and was fully encumbered, this should be
indicated.
18.6.2. Status of bankrupt’s discharge
The final R&D must also indicate the status of the bankrupt’s discharge. The type of
discharge received by the bankrupt should be noted.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 265
18.7. OSB’s role in Trustee’s discharge
The R&D must be submitted to the OSB for comment. The comment letter from the OSB will
indicate whether the administration has been satisfactorily completed and if the statement
should be taxed. If they are not satisfied with the Trustee’s administration they may so
indicate on the comment letter, which would be presented to the court at the taxation hearing.
18.8. Taxation - summary administration and consumer proposals
BIA Rules 62-67 and 96–103
The taxation procedures for summary administration bankruptcies and consumer proposals
are very similar and are outlined in the BIA. In this text, the term Trustee refers to both the
Administrator in a consumer proposal and the Trustee in a bankruptcy.
The Trustee must apply for taxation of accounts and for discharge by sending to the OSB:
 final R&D and dividend sheet; and
 copy of inspector resolution (if applicable).
The OSB will issue a comment letter outlining whether the account must be taxed before a
Registrar or not.
18.8.1. No requirement for taxation
Within 30 days of receipt of the comment letter the Trustee must submit to every proven
creditor:
 the notice of taxation and discharge in prescribed form;
 a copy of final R&D and dividend sheet; and
 the final dividend (if the Trustee is confident that no creditors will object to the taxation or
to his discharge).
The creditors have 30 days to object to the taxation or discharge. To do so they must:
 serve notice of objection to the Trustee by registered mail or courier;
 file a copy of the objection with the Registrar along with the applicable fee provided by the
tariff; and
 send a copy of the notice of objection to the OSB.
18.8.2. Requirement for taxation
When a creditor opposes the taxation or the Trustee’s discharge, the Trustee must obtain a
hearing date from the Registrar. The Trustee must also obtain a hearing date if he receives a
comment letter from the OSB requesting that his accounts be taxed.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 266
Within 30 days of receipt of the comment letter or the objection the Trustee must send the
following to every proven creditor, a minimum of 30 days prior to the hearing:
 a notice of hearing for the taxation and discharge, in prescribed form; and
 copy of the final R&D and dividend sheet (if not already sent).
18.8.3. Final dividend and discharge
If no objection is received within the 30 days after the notice of taxation and discharge, the
Trustee must complete the steps below within three months.
If the Trustee was required to appear in court for taxation and the Registrar has taxed the
account, the Trustee must complete the steps below within two months of the taxation order:
 Send each creditor the dividend owed to them (if not already done).
 Take the Trustee’s fee.
 Close the trust account.
 Remit any unclaimed dividend and undistributed funds to the OSB.
 Send a certificate of compliance and deemed discharge, in prescribed form, to the
division office.
18.9. Taxation – ordinary administration & Division I proposals
Upon review of the final R&D the OSB will issue a comment letter. The final Statement of
Receipts and Disbursements is then submitted to the Registrar in order that he may approve
it and tax the Trustee’s accounts. After the R&D has been taxed by the court the Trustee
sends a Notice of Final Dividend and Application for Discharge of Trustee (Form 11) together
with a copy of the final R&D to:
 every creditor whose claim has been proved;
 the Registrar;
 the OSB; and
 the bankrupt.
The notice advises that any notice of objection to the final R&D must be filed with the court
before the expiry of 15 days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Once 15 days has
expired, provided there has been no objection by the creditors, the Trustee will pay the final
dividends to the creditors, the levy to the OSB, and take his fees.
The notice further advises that the Trustee will apply to the court for an order of discharge on
the date noted (or as soon thereafter as the motion can be heard). Any objection to the
Trustee’s discharge must be filed with the court at least 5 days before the date noted.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 267
18.10. Trustee’s discharge
18.10.1. Ordinary administration & Division I proposal
BIA s. 41(1)
In an ordinary administration bankruptcy or Division I proposal the discharge of a Trustee is
granted by court order.
Before a Trustee can be discharged he must ensure that all outstanding matters in the estate
are complete. If there is property that could not be realized on, the Trustee, with the approval
of the inspectors may return that property to the bankrupt.
For a Trustee to be discharged he must have:
 his accounts approved by inspectors and taxed;
 all objections, applications and appeals settled or disposed of; and
 all dividends paid.
A Trustee discharge signifies that the Trustee has completed all of his duties. It also provides
the Trustee with a degree of protection from liability as the court has recognized that the work
was satisfactorily completed. The discharge provides a degree of protection to the Trustee
from any further liability in respect of:
 any act done or default made by him; and/or
 his conduct as Trustee.
Notwithstanding the discharge, the Trustee remains Trustee de facto for any future duties
that may be incidental to the full administration of the estate.
18.10.2. Summary administration & consumer proposal
Form 16
The requirements for discharging a Trustee in a summary administration bankruptcy or
consumer proposal are the same as for an ordinary bankruptcy with the following exceptions:
 discharge is deemed to occur when the Trustee issues the Certificate of Completion or
Certificate of Compliance, in prescribed form, to the OSB;
 no requirement for a court appearance unless an opposition to discharge is received.
If the OSB or creditors request the matter of the Trustee’s discharge be brought before the
courts, the discharge will occur upon court order.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 268
Assess debtor’s financial situation
Secure Trustee’s interest
The First Meeting of Creditors
Proofs of claim
Prepare documents for OSB; submit
Value assets: research methods of sale
Introduction to insolvency
Bankruptcy administration process overview
•Information resources •Glossary •Roles & duties of stakeholders
Division I Proposal administration process overview
Stay of proceedings
2
6
4
9
10
Trustee’s preliminary report
 Trustee’s report to creditors in a Division I, Consumer Proposal
Realization of assets
 Administer Division I Proposal
Administer discharge of debtor, incl. s. 170 report
Monitor file; ensure completeness; organize & close file
Administer discharge of Trustee
Administer receivership
Bankruptcy
 Proposal
Consumer Proposal administration process overview
Administer Consumer Proposal
15
19. Administer Receivership

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 269
Table of Contents
19. ADMINISTER RECEIVERSHIP ... 268
19.1. Introduction ... 271
19.1.1. Introduction ... 271
19.2. General definitions ... 272
19.2.1. Private appointment ... 272
19.2.2. Court appointment ... 272
19.3. Private appointment ... 272
19.3.1. Circumstances leading to appointment ... 272
19.3.2. Security instruments and enforceability ... 273
19.3.3. Enforcement and statutory requirements ... 273
19.3.4. Letter of appointment ... 274
19.3.5. Indemnities ... 275
19.3.6. Role and duties ... 275
19.3.7. Liability ... 276
19.4. Court appointment ... 277
19.4.1. Circumstances leading to a court appointment ... 277
19.4.2. Appointment order ... 277
19.4.3. Role and duties ... 278
19.4.4. Liability ... 279
19.5. Administration ... 279
19.5.1. Notices ... 279
19.5.2. Report to OSB ... 280
19.5.3. Reports to the court ... 280
19.5.4. Reports to creditors ... 281

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 270
19.5.5. Assets ... 281
19.5.6. Accounting ... 282
19.5.7. Financing ... 282
19.6. Taking possession, security, and stocktaking ... 282
19.6.1. Assets ... 282
19.6.2. Books, records, documents ... 283
19.6.3. Insurance ... 283
19.6.4. Employees of the debtor ... 283
19.7. Continuing operations ... 284
19.7.1. Approval (client, court) ... 284
19.7.2. Cash flow projections ... 284
19.7.3. Operating issues (employees, utilities, contracts, etc.) ... 285
19.7.4. Operating controls ... 286
19.7.5. Financing issues ... 286
19.7.6. Tax issues ... 287
19.7.7. Potential liabilities incurred in operating a business ... 287
19.7.8. Environmental concerns ... 288
19.8. Sale of assets ... 288
19.9. Final steps ... 288
19.9.1. Relinquishing possession ... 288
19.9.2. Statement of Receipts and Disbursements ... 289
19.9.3. Reporting to stakeholders (client, court, creditors, etc.) ... 289
19.9.4. Taxation... 289
19.9.5. Clearance certificates ... 290
19.9.6. Discharge ... 290

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 271

19.1. Introduction
Module objective
At the end of this module, you will be able to describe the administration of a receivership.
Assigned readings
 BIA s. 14.06; 71, 81.1, 81.2, 81.4, 243(2), 245, 246 and 250
19.1.1. Introduction
BIA s. 243(2)
Only a Trustee can be a receiver.
According to the BIA, a receiver is defined as:
“A person who has been appointed to take, or has taken possession or control, pursuant
to
a) an agreement under which property becomes subject to a security (in this Part
referred to as a “security agreement”), or
b) an order of a court made under any law that provides for or authorizes the
appointment of a receiver or receiver-manager of all or substantially all of:
a) the inventory,
b) the accounts receivable, or
c) the other property
of an insolvent person or a bankrupt that was acquired for, or is used in relation to, a
business carried on by the insolvent person or bankrupt.”
The distinction between a receiver and a receiver-manager is often made. Typically, a
receiver-manager is given the authority to continue the operations of the insolvent business
and also to seize and sell the assets of the business. A receiver, on the other hand, is usually
given only the authority to seize and sell the assets of the business. For purposes of this text,
the term ‘receiver’ will also refer to a receiver-manager unless otherwise stated.
The effect of an appointment of a receiver on a company was stated by Lord Atkinson in
Moss Steamship Co. Ltd. V. Whinney (1912):
“The appointment of a receiver and manager over the assets and business of a company
does not dissolve or annihilate the company, any more than the taking possession by the
mortgagee of the fee of land let to tenants annihilates the mortgagor. Both continue to
exist; but it entirely supersedes the company in the conduct of its business, deprives it of

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 272
all power to enter into contracts in relation to that business, or to sell, pledge, or
otherwise dispose of the property put into the possession, or under the control of the
receiver and manager. Its powers in these respects are entirely in abeyance.”
The appointment of a receiver does not affect title but allows the receiver possession of the
property. This property is then subject to the powers granted in the security instrument and/or
the appointment letter or the court order and may be subject to the rights of prior secured
creditors and certain government claims (e.g., source deductions, provincial sales tax,
GST/HST).
The appointment of a receiver may be conducted by way of a private appointment or a court
appointment.
19.2. General definitions
19.2.1. Private appointment
The receiver in a private appointment is appointed pursuant to the terms of a security
instrument held by a private lender. This private lender is typically a bank but may also be a
major supplier of materials, inventory, etc.
The authority for the receiver to act is granted within the security instrument and the
appointment letter provided by the lender.
19.2.2. Court appointment
A receiver may also be appointed by a court order. This would occur when the secured
lender makes an application to the court for such an appointment.
The court order provides the receiver with the authority to complete the duties and functions
of a receiver.
19.3. Private appointment
19.3.1. Circumstances leading to appointment
Receivership by private appointment can be described as:
“the machinery whereby a secured creditor endeavors through a receiver and manager
to recover monies which were loaned under terms against the security of certain assets,
and where either those terms have been breached or the borrower has failed to comply
with a demand for repayment.”
The objective of a receivership is to obtain repayment for the secured creditor as quickly as
possible within the overall context of the powers and authority contained within the security
instruments, and with due regard to the rights of other creditors and shareholders.
A receiver will generally be appointed in one of the following circumstances:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 273
 the borrower fails to comply with the terms of the security documentation concerning
repayment of principal and interest;
 for a variety of reasons, part or all of the principal debt is properly called by the secured
creditor, and the borrower fails or is unable to comply;
 the approved limit of a banking advance or other borrowing limit is exceeded and either
not reduced within a stipulated period, or sufficient additional security is not provided to
satisfy the lender; or
 the provisions of the security instrument are in some other way breached by the
borrower. A technical breach, such as failure to produce financial statements within a
certain time, can normally be rectified by agreement.
19.3.2. Security instruments and enforceability
A receiver can be privately appointed pursuant to a security agreement. Some of those
instruments are as follows:
 general security agreement;
 debenture;
 trust deed; or
 mortgage.
Generally, when a financial institution lends money, the borrower is required to sign
numerous loan documents along with a security agreement. It is the security agreement
which provides for the appointment of a receiver should the debtor not comply with certain
criteria.
The powers of the receiver are specified within the security agreement. Those powers and
privileges result from the fact that the receiver’s appointment is the exercise of a contractual
remedy by the secured creditor.
It should be noted that if a security agreement does not authorize the appointment of a
receiver, the lender cannot seek a privately-appointed receiver. This fact, however, does not
preclude the lender from seeking a court-appointed receiver.
19.3.3. Enforcement and statutory requirements
Receivers are subject to statutory regulation by several federal and provincial acts.
Prior to accepting any appointment as receiver, it must first be determined whether or not you
have a conflict of interest. If a conflict of interest is apparent, the appointment must be turned
down.
CAIRP’s Rules of Professional Conduct state that:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 274
“A member shall not permit himself to be placed in a position of conflict of interest; in
keeping with this principle, a member shall not accept any appointment:
(a) which is prohibited by law
(b) as a receiver, a receiver-manager, agent for a secured creditor, liquidator or a
Trustee under the BIA in respect of any insolvent person or corporation where the
member is, or at any time during the immediately preceding two years, was:
(i) related to such person or corporation
(ii) the auditor or accountant of such person or corporation.”
The Canada Business Corporation Act does not prevent an auditor from acting as receiver.
However, if a company is provincially incorporated, the relevant provincial act may contain
such prohibitions. For example, the Ontario Business Corporations Act specifies that a firm
cannot act as receiver if it has served as auditor within the last two years. Furthermore, the
CAIRP interpretations of the Rules of Professional Conduct mention the same prohibition, in
order to maintain independence.
Once it has been determined that no conflict exists, the secured creditor’s security should be
reviewed by legal counsel. This should be done prior to enforcement proceedings to ensure
that the security instrument is valid and properly registered under the appropriate legislation
governing the security. The question of the validity of the security relates to its basic
contractual terms including: proper execution, registration within the prescribed time period,
and consideration being advanced.
Before accepting an appointment, the receiver must be satisfied that the security is also
enforceable. Again, independent legal advice should be sought to establish that the security
is also enforceable. For the security to be enforceable, a default must have occurred and
reasonable notice must have been given.
It must be determined that a default has occurred under the security agreement and that the
default has not been waived by the lender. To determine if a default has occurred, the terms
of the default, as listed in the security instrument, must be reviewed and assessed as to
whether or not they have occurred.
Once the secured creditor (often with the assistance of legal counsel) has determined that
default has occurred and it has reached the decision to realize on its security, the secured
creditor can demand its loan. Current case law indicates that a secured creditor must give
reasonable time to a debtor to comply with the demand for payment of an obligation. Only
after this period of reasonable notice has elapsed or the debtor company has waived notice
should a secured creditor enforce its security by the appointment of a receiver.
19.3.4. Letter of appointment
A privately appointed receiver is granted authority to act pursuant to the security agreement
and appointment letter. It is also these two documents which set out the duties of the
receiver.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 275
The main powers which the receiver will generally find in the letter of appointment or security
agreement are as follows:
 to take possession of all assets and property covered by the security;
 to manage such property and the business of the company, if necessary;
 to receive any monies owing to the debtor;
 to sell any property covered by the security instrument; and
 to borrow money required for the protection of the property.
19.3.5. Indemnities
It is common practice for insolvency practitioners to request a written indemnity from the
secured lender appointing him to act as receiver. Typically, the lender is requested to
indemnify the insolvency practitioner to save him from harm resulting from all liabilities,
claims, or lawsuits arising from acting as receiver except for those which might arise due to
willful misconduct or negligence.
A receiver seeks an indemnity to protect himself from:
 trespass and damages – this would include the receiver’s liability arising from damages
incurred due to loss of future profits arising from the secured lender’s security being
invalid or reasonable notice not being given;
 environmental liability – any liability for clean-up that potentially could be incurred by a
receiver who is in possession and control of the assets where an environmental matter or
condition exists;
 product liability – potential liability arising out of the receiver’s completion of work-inprocess which may be in excess of product liability insurance available or taken;
 employee / successor employer liability – receivers should always be concerned with the
potential liability or the cost of litigation associated with a claim, warranted or not, relating
to successor employer issues; and
 costs / fees of the receiver – the receiver would typically seek an indemnity to ensure that
the secured lender will guarantee the receiver’s costs and expenses if the assets held as
security were insufficient to pay him in full.
19.3.6. Role and duties
In the typical security agreement, the private receiver is deemed to be the agent of the debtor
company for purposes of possession and realization, and to be the agent of the creditor for
purposes of distribution. The purpose of such a clause is to ensure that the receiver has
authority to possess, use and realize on the company’s assets. Liability for the actions of the
receiver is placed on the debtor company, while still allowing the receiver to act on behalf of
the security holder. This clause is referred to as a dual agency clause.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 276
Furthermore, the deemed agency clause also results in the limitation of some of the powers
of the receiver. As he is deemed to be an agent for the debtor corporation, the powers and
rights of the receiver over contracts, assets, etc. are no greater than that of the debtor.
In reality, however, the privately appointed receiver has a fiduciary obligation to the security
holder who provided the appointment. As stated by Frank Bennett in Bennett on Receivership
(2nd Edition, page 27).
“The receiver’s duty is to take possession of the charged property for the express
purpose of recouping the loan to the security holder together with the duty to manage the
operations of the debtor for the protection of the security.”
The Canada Business Corporations Act, along with some provincial corporations acts,
imposes duties on receivers. As indicated earlier, the receiver must act honestly and in good
faith. Any sale conducted by the receiver must be done in a commercially reasonable manner
with the objective of obtaining the best possible price for the goods in question.
Also, the receiver must be able to adequately account for any sales proceeds and turn over
any surplus funds to the debtor, a Trustee in a bankruptcy and/or other creditors.
19.3.7. Liability
There are numerous issues and areas of liability for which the receiver may become
responsible. These issues will be discussed at length throughout this module. The receiver
should pay particular attention to a number of areas, including:
 liability for trespass;
 product liability;
 liability for existing contracts;
 liability for new contracts;
 environmental liability;
 employee liability and successor rights; and
 liability for outstanding government claims.
It should be noted that this list is not exhaustive. The receiver must consider all aspects of
potential liability throughout his appointment.
Section 14.06 provides the receiver with some protection from liability, in particular with
regards to successor employer claims and environmental matters.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 277
19.4. Court appointment
19.4.1. Circumstances leading to a court appointment
A secured creditor may apply to the court for the appointment of a court-appointed receiver
upon the default of a debtor under a security agreement.
It is usually appropriate to apply to the court when the receivership involves any of the
following:
 extremely complex issues;
 foreign jurisdictions;
 conflicts between multiple secured creditors; and/or
 a high potential for disputes.
19.4.2. Appointment order
In order to apply to the court for the appointment of a receiver, the secured creditor must go
through a number of steps. The secured creditor must establish that he has a legal right to
enforce his security and that the debtor has not remedied the default.
The motion to appoint a court-appointed receiver may be made ex parte, or without notice to
the debtor, if the secured creditor can justify the urgency of the situation. An ex parte motion
is typically used when the debtor is about to abscond with or dispose of the secured assets to
the detriment of the secured creditor.
The source of a court-appointed receiver’s powers is the court order. The scope and
limitations of these powers should be clearly specified in the order. The receiver is only
authorized to act within these specified powers.
The typical powers in a court order would include the following:
 the appointment of the receiver. In addition, the assets which are to be the subject of the
appointment should be clearly described together with details of any encumbrances;
 the authority for the receiver to be given access to the assets of the debtor and also the
books and records;
 the power to conduct litigation in the course of the receivership. It is easier to obtain such
an order from the court in the early stages of the receivership rather than attempt to
obtain specific approval at a later stage;
 acknowledgement that other creditors or claimants are prevented from proceeding
against the debtor or receiver, without the leave of the court. This clause is of particular
importance to a receiver who intends to carry on the business of the debtor and who
would be at risk for the loss of critical assets needed for carrying on the business without
such an order;

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 278
 the authority to determine that the business should not be carried on;
 the authority to borrow money and to secure such borrowings on the assets of the debtor
by way of receiver’s certificates, usually in priority to the security interests of the plaintiff
and any other encumbrances;
 the authority to arrange for the sale of the assets, subject to final approval of any
particular sale by the court;
 the right to apply to the court for advice and direction;
 assurance that the receiver is paid his fees and for expenditures properly incurred in the
course of his administration of the receivership. The clause usually provides that the
amount of such expenditures and fees must be a charge on the assets of the debtor, in
priority to the security of the plaintiff and other encumbrances, and subject to taxation;
 procedures for the passing of the receiver’s accounts and for payment of the funds in the
receiver’s hands as directed by the court; and
 provisions that the plaintiff’s costs incurred in connection with the application of the
receiver should be paid by the receiver in priority to the plaintiff and/or other creditors.
While this list is not exhaustive, these are examples of what appears in a typical court order.
Should there be specific clauses necessary for the debtor in question, these matters should
be brought to the attention of the court so that any proper remedies may be incorporated into
the order.
As indicated above, a court-appointed receiver may turn to the court for direction. Some
examples of when a receiver may apply for direction are:
 to resolve disputes which cannot be resolved by negotiation;
 to settle issues as to priority of creditors;
 to approve the selling process;
 to approve the sale of assets, which in effect ‘blesses’ the selling price;
 to borrow funds; and
 to close down the operations of the business (liquidate versus operate).
19.4.3. Role and duties
In exercising the powers in the court order, the receiver must remember that a courtappointed receiver is an independent officer of the court with a duty to be fair, impartial and to
act in the best interests of all parties concerned. The court-appointed receiver is not an agent
of either the secured creditor or the debtor and thus should not take direction from either.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 279
19.4.4. Liability
Court-appointed receivers, like privately appointed receivers, must deal with existing
contracts of the debtor company. As with a private appointment, these contracts are not
automatically terminated. However, greater care must be taken by a court-appointed receiver
in breaking a contract, as a duty of care is also owed to other creditors and the debtor. If a
receiver chooses to break a contract, leave of the court should be sought.
A court-appointed receiver may only enter into new contracts if permitted by the court order.
When a court-appointed receiver enters into new contracts, it is a principal and becomes
personally liable for the fulfillment of these contracts. The receiver does, however, have the
right to be indemnified from the assets under his control and management.
19.5. Administration
19.5.1. Notices
BIA s. 245 and 246
BIA Rules s. 124, 125, 126 and 127
According to the BIA and the Bankruptcy and Insolvency General Rules, the receiver is
required to send notice of his appointment in prescribed form to:
 the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy;
 all known creditors;
 the debtor; and
 the Trustee in a bankruptcy (if the debtor is bankrupt).
This notice must be sent as soon as possible and no later than 10 days after being appointed
receiver.
The act also requires the receiver to file an initial report for distribution. This report is sent to:
 the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy;
 the debtor; and
 any creditor who requests a copy.
The report must include the following:
 names, addresses and amounts owed to all creditors;
 a list of assets under the possession or control of the receiver, along with their book
values; and
 a statement of the receiver’s intended plan of action.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 280
The receiver must also prepare interim reports no later than six months after the previous
report which must include:
 a Statement of Receipts and Disbursements
 a statement of all property which has not yet been sold or otherwise realized; and
 information about the anticipated completion of the receivership.
This report must be sent to the same parties as the original report noted above.
Finally, upon completion of his duties, the receiver must immediately prepare a final report
which includes:
 a Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements;
 an explanation of how all receipts were distributed;
 details of disposition of any property of which the receiver has taken possession (or
control) and that is not accounted for in the final R&D; and
 any other significant information about the receivership.
This report must be sent to the same parties as the original report noted above.
Furthermore, some provincial Personal Property Security Acts (PPSAs) impose notice
requirements upon receivers (both private and court-appointed) with which they must comply
prior to selling assets. Thus, ensure that you have determined any such requirements in your
province before you begin selling assets.
19.5.2. Report to OSB
The BIA imposes duties on a receiver to advise the debtor, creditors and the Official Receiver
of its appointment within 10 days. In addition, the receiver is obligated to provide regular
reports to the Official Receiver and those parties who request the information. These reports
outline the receiver’s plan for disposition of the assets, its interim progress and its accounts.
Most provincial company acts, as well as the Canada Business Corporations Act, require that
financial statements be prepared by a receiver every six months and made available upon
request to interested parties. In the past, such financial statements have been limited to a
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements. However, depending on their intended purpose,
reports may include statements of financial position, deficit and realization.
19.5.3. Reports to the court
In a court-appointed receivership the receiver, given his broad fiduciary duty to all creditors,
is required to send out notices of his appointment as well as notices to interested parties of
any subsequent court applications.
Reports in support of an application for direction must include all the facts along with legal
opinions, appraisals, affidavits and recommendations for the court to consider. As a result,

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 281
reports to the court tend to be more extensive and take far more time to prepare. Any report
to the court becomes a matter of public record unless otherwise directed by the court.
Given the judicial process involved, not only do certain time-consuming procedures result in
increased legal and receiver fees, but the decision-making process is invariably longer. In
addition, there always exists an element of uncertainty should another party oppose the
receiver’s application. This stands in contrast with the immediate communication and
feedback between the privately appointed receiver and secured creditor.
19.5.4. Reports to creditors
In a private appointment, reporting to a secured creditor would include verbal updates as the
circumstances require. Within a few days of taking possession, a confidential written report
setting out the receiver’s initial findings, conclusions and recommendations as to realization
may be required by the secured creditor.
Reports must be issued on a timely basis in order the keep the secured creditor informed of
all major developments. Typically, where operations are continuing, a report, including an upto-date Statement of Receipts and Disbursements, is prepared at least monthly.
19.5.5. Assets
BIA s. 81.1, 81.2, 81.4 and 81.6
It is the role of the receiver to sell the assets in his possession (or the interest therein) for the
best price and terms he can obtain in the circumstances. To do so, the receiver should take
all the necessary measures and means for obtaining the best price. This safeguards the
interests of not only the secured creditor who appointed him but the lower ranking secured
creditors and the ordinary unsecured creditors.
To avoid all criticism and the possibility of lawsuits due to poor administration or an
improvident sale, the receiver should take all appropriate steps towards obtaining optimum
realization and ensure that the assets are liquidated for an optimum return. Additionally,
valuations, appraisals, etc. will reinforce the fact that the receiver sold the goods for the
proper value.
The receiver must be aware of numerous competing claims over the assets he takes into his
possession.
The BIA imposes a duty on the receiver to return, or otherwise deal with goods delivered by a
supplier in the 30 days before the appointment of the receiver, if a demand for repossession
of same is received in the 15 days after the receivership. The BIA also imposes duties on the
receiver relating to goods delivered by farmers and fishermen no more than 15 days prior to
the receiver’s appointment, if a claim for these goods is received in the 30 days after the
receivership.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 282
19.5.6. Accounting
Records relating to the administration of the receivership should be prepared with the utmost
accuracy by the receiver. These records will be necessary to protect the receiver against
claims for outstanding tax debt, accusations of improper sales and/or expenses, etc.
The receiver, as a payer or collector of tax, is required to retain these books and records of
account for a period of approximately six years pursuant to ITA s. 230(5) (In Quebec, section
35.3 of the Tax Administration Act) and s. 5800(1)(c ) of the Income Tax Regulations.
19.5.7. Financing
Issues regarding financing typically occur when the decision is made to continue operating
the debtor business in order to maximize realization. For more detail, please refer to the
section on Continuing Operations – Financing Issues later in this text.
19.6. Taking possession, security, and stocktaking
19.6.1. Assets
Upon appointment, the receiver immediately becomes responsible for the assets charged to
the secured creditor. The receiver must ensure that adequate controls are in place to protect
those assets since he is ultimately responsible to the appointing creditor, the debtor and to
other secured and unsecured creditors. Immediately upon being appointed, the receiver
should ensure that the following issues have been completed and dealt with:
 physical security of assets;
 security over data in electronic format (remote access to computers, etc.):
 insurance;
 assets at third party premises;
 third party property;
 accounting records;
 cash and banking;
 book debts;
 inventory;
 security over intellectual property;
 restriction on movement of goods; and
 re-direction of mail.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 283
19.6.2. Books, records, documents
While the debtor’s books and records are ultimately the responsibility of the company
directors, it is advisable that the receiver retain them for a period of time. This will allow the
receiver to review them to determine what may be required to administer the assets under his
appointment. They will also prove useful if it is necessary to prepare cash flow projections
and/or pro forma statements. Moreover, these records will be necessary to substantiate the
receiver’s claims over assets with competing secured creditor claims, outstanding
receivables, existing contracts, etc.
The receiver should obtain written authorization from the debtor company to either return the
books and records relating to the period before the appointment of the receiver or destroy
them as the records are the responsibility of the directors.
19.6.3. Insurance
Immediately upon taking possession of the debtor’s assets, the receiver should review and
confirm existing insurance coverage. Some receivers who maintain their own property and
casualty contingency insurance package may rely heavily on the automatic coverage
provisions for expediency purposes.
There are risks associated with relying on such blanket coverage. To the extent two
insurance policies (the receiver’s and the debtor’s) co-exist and provide duplicate coverage, it
is argued that a risk remains due to the standard wording used, that neither policy would
cover any loss or damage insured by any other policy.
Pre-existing coverage is sometimes terminated in favour of blanket coverage in order to
realize on unearned premiums. However, the receiver runs the risk of not being able to
secure coverage at the pre-existing rates and of relying on blanket coverage which may be
somewhat limited.
Needless to say, it is imperative to consult with an experienced insurance broker to discuss
insurance requirements to suit the particular situation.
19.6.4. Employees of the debtor
The rights of employees in insolvency situations are unsettled areas and must be considered
for both union and non-union shops. The continuation of bargaining rights of employees and
collective agreements, despite changes in the legal entity constituting the employer, are of
critical concern to purchasers of a business from a receiver. The purchaser could be
considered a successor employer.
The factors which are considered in determining whether or not a major portion of the
business has been sold, which could result in the purchaser being considered a successor
employer, include:
 Has there been a continuation of the business?

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 284
 Is the nature of the work performed subsequent to the transaction the same as the nature
of the work prior to the transaction?
 Has there been a transfer of assets, i.e., goodwill, customer lists, inventory or accounts
receivable?
 Is there continuity of management and product?
Where a court finds that a business has been sold as a complete entity within the terms
noted above, the purchaser remains subject not only to the terms of the collective agreement,
but also to any outstanding grievances under the collective agreement relating to the conduct
of his predecessor. This would be the case regardless of whether or not the purchaser has
actual notice of the collective agreement or whether or not arbitration proceedings were
pending at the date of sale.
A purchaser would then be responsible for severance pay owing to the employees as well as
for all outstanding grievances. The effect of this is to substantially increase the risk to a
potential purchaser. A prudent purchaser will, therefore, take all of these factors into
consideration when arriving at a purchase price for the assets.
Please be mindful that WEPPA, as covered in Module 17, also applies in a Receivership.
19.7. Continuing operations
19.7.1. Approval (client, court)
One of the more important aspects of the receivership takes place in the very early stages of
the appointment. This is the determination of the viability of the enterprise in the future. The
mere fact that the enterprise has been placed into receivership does not necessarily mean
that it is not viable. The receiver should initially review the enterprise’s various facets to
determine whether or not the business should be operated in an attempt to sell it as a going
concern, whether the assets should be immediately liquidated, or whether the operations
should be continued on a limited, decreasing basis to enhance the value of certain assets
(such as work in process and accounts receivable).
Prior to making the decision on whether or not to continue operations, approval of the
appointing creditor or the court, assuming that the court order grants the receiver power to
continue operations, should be obtained. Any decision to continue operations of the business
should be weighed heavily as the receiver, appointing creditor, and other interested parties
would be greatly affected by any potential liability claims. These potential liabilities are
discussed further in this section.
19.7.2. Cash flow projections
The decision to operate versus liquidate is basically a cost/benefit decision. The receiver
must prepare a detailed cash flow forecast to support the decision. The cash flow along with
the risks, costs and potential benefits should be presented to the secured creditor/court for
approval.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 285
19.7.3. Operating issues (employees, utilities, contracts, etc.)
At the commencement of any receivership, the receiver is faced with the decision as to
whether or not to retain any or all of the company’s staff. If it is the receiver’s intent to carry
on with the business, then the normal procedure is to advise the employees that their
employment with the debtor company has been terminated. The receiver then re-hires those
employees who are required.
In those instances where there are outstanding wages due to employees, the receiver must
decide, in conjunction with his client, whether or not those wages will be paid. Normally,
employees will not commit to continue with the receiver until the matter of their outstanding
wages has been clarified.
For those employees who will not be retained by the receiver, the receiver should look to the
provisions of the BIA s. 81.4 and the WEPPA (as discussed in Module 17) to determine their
rights.
For those employees who will be retained by the receiver, each province has its own labor
legislation which dictates certain standards between employers and employees. While the
laws may vary from province to province, they normally cover such items as hours of work,
overtime compensation and notice requirements regarding termination and severance pay.
With concerns about being paid for current outstanding debt owed by the debtor, many
suppliers and/or utility companies will not be anxious to continue to trade with the receiver.
Often suppliers will insist that all future sales be on a cash on delivery (COD) basis, if they
agree to deal with the receiver at all. In order for the future operations to be successful, the
receiver must have a guaranteed supply of materials to work with. Skill as an effective
negotiator will definitely be an asset in such situations.
In a private receivership, the receiver will be faced with existing contracts that must be dealt
with and may also enter into new contracts.
Existing contracts of the debtor company are not automatically terminated by a private
receivership. The obligation of the debtor company to perform under the contract continues.
Generally, the receiver can decide whether or not to carry out the contractual agreement. If
the receiver chooses not to fulfill the terms of the contract, a breach occurs and the injured
party may make a claim against the debtor company for damages. This claim for damages
will be an unsecured claim against the debtor company.
To enter into a new contract, the receiver must be permitted to do so under the powers
granted by the security instrument and appointment letter or court order. When entering into
a new contract, the receiver must realize that he is obligated to fulfill the contractual
agreement and must be aware of the liability being undertaken. Before signing a contract, a
receiver must evaluate the cost/benefit of entering into the contract.
Upon signing a contract, a receiver will be liable in its capacity as receiver and may be
personally liable. When acting in the capacity of receiver, liability is limited to the assets
under administration. However, if a receiver is liable in a personal capacity, the liability is not

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 286
limited to the administered assets. As a result, a receiver should only enter into contracts in
its capacity as receiver and expressly exclude personal liability.
19.7.4. Operating controls
While estates may differ as to the assets and property under the control of the receiver, a
number of controls are common in the majority of appointments. These items can be
prioritized depending on the circumstances but should be carried out immediately upon
appointment as receiver. Some of these items include:
 establishing controls for inventory taking procedures, including stock-in-trade and fixed
assets;
 ensuring the physical security of the assets;
 ensuring continued supply of utilities (if applicable); and
 determining liabilities regarding priority creditors.
19.7.5. Financing issues
Having decided to resume operations, the receiver may require an injection of working capital
at the outset.
In a private appointment, the power to take action such as continuing operations, borrowing
funds, etc. would be contained within the terms of the security agreement. In most situations,
the appointing creditor would advance the funds required which, if not repaid by the receiver,
would be added to the debtor’s outstanding indebtedness.
In a court appointment, the receiver would usually obtain an order authorizing him to borrow
and issue receiver’s certificates, pledging as security the debtor’s assets and specifying such
borrowing to rank ahead of prior encumbrances. Although a privately appointed receiver may
be empowered to issue receiver’s certificates, such certificates would be subject to the prior
encumbrances and therefore would not be a viable alternative.
The priority of receiver’s costs, fees or borrowings is not normally an issue, but in a few
situations the receiver ends up not having sufficient assets to pay off his borrowings.
A privately appointed receiver usually requests an indemnity from the lender for all the
receiver’s actions, to the extent that the receiver has acted properly in the discharge of his
duty. Accordingly, he would look to the lender to satisfy any shortfall.
A court-appointed receiver, who is neither an agent of the debtor nor of the secured creditor
and who incurs obligations in the course of the receivership, would be personally liable for
such obligations unless such liability has been disclaimed. A lender may be satisfied with a
statement that the receiver does not assume a personal liability for the loans, in situations
where the receiver made borrowings pursuant to a court order and charged the assets under
his administration to secure repayment.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 287
19.7.6. Tax issues
A purchaser may wish to buy the shares of a corporation as opposed to the assets of the
corporation. This would be done in instances where the purchaser may take advantage of
any tax loss carry forwards. The Income Tax Act imposes several restrictions over trading in
losses. These apply where there is a change of control of the corporation.
Generally, a change of control will not have any effect on losses incurred in the year that
control changes. Business losses carry over, but can only be applied against future income
from the same or similar business as that in which the losses were incurred. Furthermore, the
business must have been carried on by the corporation throughout the year in which the loss
is to be applied and continuously from the time when control changed, with a reasonable
expectation of profit. Net capital losses of prior years expire upon the change of control. The
precise way in which these rules will apply under any particular circumstances is often
complex. In these situations, tax advice from an expert in the field should be sought.
19.7.7. Potential liabilities incurred in operating a business
In some instances it may be proper to consider resuming operations of the debtor company.
However, the receiver should be fully aware of potential liabilities with the operational
receivership. Some of these liabilities include:
 product liability;
 environmental liability;
 successor employer liability;
 tax liability;
 day-to-day payroll and overhead costs;
 professional fees to oversee operations;
 lack of customer support;
 lack of supplier support;
 lack of co-operation of key management, trade unions or employees;
 risk of unanticipated costs; and
 inability to provide a warranty on unfinished goods, which may reduce realization.
While the list above merely includes examples, it should be noted that such liability would
significantly decrease any net realization from the sale of the debtor company’s assets. As a
result, the receiver is cautioned to explore all potential areas of concern prior to operating an
insolvent business.
BIA s. 14.06 provides the receiver with some protection from liability, in particular with
regards to successor employer claims and environmental matters.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 288
19.7.8. Environmental concerns
BIA s. 14.06(2)
All aspects of environment law should be of major concern to receivers and secured lenders,
especially when it becomes necessary to call a loan and realize on secured assets. While
changes to the BIA provide some protection to a receiver, environmental concerns must be
assessed and weighed prior to accepting an appointment as receiver. Prior to taking
possession, a review should be undertaken of the debtor’s business from the perspective of
environmental risks and costs.
A secured creditor in possession of a debtor’s business may be deemed to be an owner
under the applicable environmental law and may be responsible for the costs of
environmental clean-up. The key is to determine ahead of time whether or not the clean-up
costs exceed the realizable value of the assets. It just may not be worth taking possession.
In addition to clean-up costs, a secured creditor must also consider the potential statutory
civil liability which may arise for loss or damage resulting from pollution that leaches onto
surrounding properties.
It is critical to remember that environmental concerns should be determined prior to taking
possession. Depending upon the risks, the secured creditor may hire an environmental
consultant to conduct an environmental audit to assess the potential environmental liabilities.
19.8. Sale of assets
Please refer to Module 12 “Value Assets, Research Methods of Sale”, and Module 13,
“Realization of assets.”
19.9. Final steps
19.9.1. Relinquishing possession
The normal terms of a sale by a receiver are absent of any representations as to title,
description or condition of the assets, i.e., there are no warranties and the assets are sold on
an “as is, where is” basis.
The receiver sells his right, title and interest in the assets. The onus is on the purchaser to
make sure that he is satisfied with respect to the terms of the sale. As such, he is permitted
all reasonable opportunity to inspect the assets. Also, the purchaser is responsible for
payment of any applicable taxes and ensuring that the receiver has obtained the necessary
clearance certificates.
The receiver can only sell those assets to which the debtor has title, charged by the security
instrument; he is in no better position than the debtor and cannot undertake a sale when he
has no title to the assets which he is selling.

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 289
19.9.2. Statement of Receipts and Disbursements
The receiver is responsible for preparing his Statement of Receipts and Disbursements. This
statement will provide a detailed breakdown of all funds received throughout the receivership
process along with the associated realization and/or operating expenses. Also, the statement
will incorporate payouts to any creditors with competing security rights, along with a list of
any assets which have yet to be realized on.
This statement would be incorporated with any reporting to relevant stakeholders as
discussed below.
19.9.3. Reporting to stakeholders (client, court, creditors, etc.)
BIA s. 246
The frequency of reporting, as well as to whom to report, are usually outlined in the Letter of
Appointment (private appointment) or the Court Order (court appointment).
In most estates, the receiver would limit his reporting to the court or secured lender as
required under the BIA. However, there are instances where further reporting may be
required. Specifically, in Ontario, under the Personal Property Security Act, certain rights
available to other creditors are outlined. Other provinces may have similar legislation, and
you are advised to review your provinces companies’ and/or PPSA legislation to determine
any specific mandatory procedures.
Depending on the complexity of the appointment, your clients’ reporting requirements may
vary. It is important to provide your client with the basic information required to update him on
the progress to date or to finalize the estate if it is a final report. You should be concise,
factual and timely.
In those instances where there are other secured lenders holding subordinate security on
assets under the receiver’s control, they should be advised of actions that would directly
impact them. A typical instance would be when assets are sold for an amount less than what
is owed to the primary security holder.
A court-appointed receiver will conclude his appointment by preparing a report and circulating
these documents to all those who have an interest in the matter. Presumably, this would
include all of the estate’s creditors and the court. It may also be necessary to provide this
information if the receiver resigns or is replaced prior to the conclusion of the estate.
A court-appointed receiver has a broader obligation to be accountable than does the privately
appointed receiver. This is because the court-appointed receiver has a duty to all of the
creditors as opposed to a specific secured lender.
19.9.4. Taxation
The court may order the receiver to submit the Statement of Accounts to the court for review
on receipt of an application by the Superintendent, the insolvent person, the Trustee (in the
case of a bankrupt) or a creditor. This application must be made within six months after the

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 290
Statement of Accounts was provided to the Superintendent. This means that the court,
through the taxation process, will confirm or adjust the amount of the billing. This process
acts to ensure that the creditors have received value for their money and that the receiver’s
charges are reasonable. The court can question the receiver regarding his services and can
reduce his billings if it is found that the receiver acted outside his mandate or billed for
services which were not required of him, or that the charges were excessive.
The privately appointed receiver submits his final billing to his client for approval. If the client
is dissatisfied with the billing, he would normally address it directly with the receiver.
However, there are provisions in certain provinces for the fees of a privately appointed
receiver to be taxed by the court or a “Taxing Master.” Taxing Masters are normally senior
lawyers who are appointed by the court to act in this capacity. You should check within your
own jurisdiction to determine whether or not the court will tax the fees of a privately appointed
receiver.
19.9.5. Clearance certificates
The receiver is required to keep books and records of accounting in order to prepare returns
and calculate taxes payable. This obligation is set out in legislation such as the Income Tax
Act, the Excise Tax Act, and various provincial acts such as Provincial Retail Sales Tax Acts.
Clearance certificates must be requested from the Receiver General and/or Provincial
Minister of Revenue before the receiver can distribute any property under his control. If a
clearance certificate is not obtained, the receiver may be found personally liable for any
unpaid taxes, interest and penalties, without limitation on the personal liability up to the value
of the property distributed.
19.9.6. Discharge
Whether the receiver is privately or court-appointed, he must be formally discharged once his
functions have been completed. E. Bruce Leonard in his Guide to Commercial Insolvency in
Canada states:
“The successful passing of accounts by a court-appointed receiver and the submission of
a Final Statement of Receipts and Disbursements by a private receiver to his appointing
creditor results in the discharge of the receiver from his position as receiver.
In the case of a court-appointed receiver, the court may require that the notice of the
receiver’s application for discharge be distributed to interested or affected parties. Once
this is done, the discharge will then act to absolve the receiver from any future actions by
aggrieved parties.”
Leonard goes on to say that the privately appointed receiver enjoys no such luxury and:
“Generally speaking, a privately appointed receiver can be protected from the claims of
other creditors with interests in the administration only through their consent to the
receiver’s accounting of his administration.”
And further:

Insolvency Administration | July 2020 291
“By and large, however, the obligations of a private receiver will continue after the
conclusion of his administration; consequently, privately appointed receivers generally
will request indemnities from their appointing creditors which will continue to apply after
the distribution of the assets in their hands.”